It didn’t take much to bring on certain kinds of ill will. Simply separ-
ating the boys into two residence cabins was enough to stimulate a “we
vs. they” feeling between the groups; and assigning names to the two
groups (the Eagles and the Rattlers) accelerated the sense of rivalry.
The boys soon began to demean the qualities and accomplishments of
the other group. But these forms of hostility were minor compared to
what occurred when the experimenters purposely introduced compet-
itive activities into the factions’ meetings with one another. Cabin against
cabin treasure hunts, tugs-of-war, and athletic contests produced name-
calling and physical friction. During the competitions, members of the
opposing team were labeled “cheaters,” “sneaks,” and “stinkers.” Af-
terward, cabins were raided, rival banners were stolen and burned,
threatening signs were posted, and lunchroom scuffles were common-
place.
At this point, it was evident to Sherif that the recipe for disharmony
was quick and easy: Just separate the participants into groups and let
sit for a while in their own juices. Then mix together over the flame of
continued competition. And there you have it: Cross-group hatred at
a rolling boil.
A more challenging issue then faced the experimenters: how to re-
move the entrenched hostility they had created. They first tried the
contact approach of bringing the bands together more often. But even
when the joint activities were pleasant ones, such as movies and social
events, the results were disastrous. Picnics produced food fights, enter-
tainment programs gave way to shouting contests, dining-hall lines
degenerated into shoving matches. Sherif and his research team began
to worry that in Dr. Frankenstein fashion, they might have created a
monster they could no longer control. Then, at the height of the strife,
they hit on a resolution that was at once simple and effective.
They constructed a series of situations in which competition between
the groups would have harmed everyone’s interests, in which coopera-
tion was necessary for mutual benefit. On a daylong outing, the single
truck available to go into town for food was “found” to be stuck. The
boys were assembled and all pulled and pushed together until the
vehicle was on its way. In another instance, the researchers arranged
for an interruption of the camp’s water supply, which came through
pipes from a distant tank. Presented with the common crisis and realiz-
ing the need for unified action, the boys organized themselves harmo-
niously to find and fix the problem before day’s end. In yet another
circumstance requiring cooperation, the campers were informed that
a desirable movie was available for rental but that the camp could not
afford it. Aware that the only solution was to combine resources, the136 / Influence