officers, either because the part suits him or because it is merely his
turn, plays the role of Bad Cop. Before the suspect even sits down, Bad
Cop curses “the son of a bitch” for the robbery. For the rest of the session
his words come only with snarls and growls. He kicks the prisoner’s
chair to emphasize his points. When he looks at the man, he seems to
see a mound of garbage. If the suspect challenges Bad Cop’s accusations
or just refuses to answer them, Bad Cop becomes livid. His rage soars.
He swears he will do everything possible to assure a maximum sentence.
He says he has friends in the district attorney’s office who will hear
from him of the suspect’s noncooperative attitude and who will prosec-
ute the case hard.
At the outset of Bad Cop’s performance, his partner, Good Cop, sits
in the background. Then, slowly, he starts to chip in. First he speaks
only to Bad Cop, trying to temper the burgeoning anger. “Calm down,
Frank, calm down.” But Bad Cop shouts back, “Don’t tell me to calm
down when he’s lying right to my face! I hate these lying bastards!” A
bit later, Good Cop actually says something in the suspect’s behalf.
“Take it easy, Frank, he’s only a kid.” Not much in the way of support,
but compared to the rantings of Bad Cop, the words fall like music on
the prisoner’s ears. Still, Bad Cop is unconvinced. “Kid? He’s no kid.
He’s a punk. That’s what he is, a punk. And I’ll tell you something else.
He’s over eighteen, and that’s all I need to get his ass sent so far behind
bars they’ll need a flashlight to find him.”
Now Good Cop begins to speak directly to the young man, calling
him by his first name and pointing out any positive details of the case.
“I’ll tell you, Kenny, you’re lucky that nobody was hurt and you weren’t
armed. When you come up for sentencing, that’ll look good.” If the
suspect persists in claiming innocence, Bad Cop launches into another
tirade of curses and threats. But this time Good Cop stops him, “Okay,
Frank,” handing Bad Cop some money, “I think we could all use some
coffee. How about getting us three cups?” When Bad Cop is gone, it’s
time for Good Cop’s big scene: “Look, man, I don’t know why, but my
partner doesn’t like you, and he’s gonna try to get you. And he’s gonna
be able to do it because we’ve got enough evidence right now. And he’s
right about the D.A.’s office going hard on guys who don’t cooperate.
You’re looking at five years, man, five years! Now, I don’t want to see
that happen to you. So if you admit you robbed that place right now,
before he gets back, I’ll take charge of your case and put in a good word
for you to the D.A. If we work together on this, we can cut that five
years down to two, maybe one. Do us both a favor, Kenny. Just tell me
how you did it, and then let’s start working on getting you through
this.” A full confession frequently follows.
Good Cop/Bad Cop works as well as it does for several reasons: TheRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 141