thing—in this instance, room-temperature water—can be made to seem
very different, depending on the nature of the event that precedes it.
Be assured that the nice little weapon of influence provided by the
contrast principle does not go unexploited. The great advantage of this
principle is not only that it works but also that it is virtually undetect-
able. Those who employ it can cash in on its influence without any ap-
pearance of having structured the situation in their favor. Retail clothiers
are a good example. Suppose a man enters a fashionable men’s store
and says that he wants to buy a three-piece suit and a sweater. If you
were the salesperson, which would you show him first to make him
likely to spend the most money? Clothing stores instruct their sales
personnel to sell the costly item first. Common sense might suggest the
reverse: If a man has just spent a lot of money to purchase a suit, he
may be reluctant to spend very much more on the purchase of a
sweater. But the clothiers know better. They behave in accordance with
what the contrast principle would suggest: Sell the suit first, because
when it comes time to look at sweaters, even expensive ones, their prices
will not seem as high in comparison. A man might balk at the idea of
spending $95 for a sweater, but if he has just bought a $495 suit, a $95
sweater does not seem excessive. The same principle applies to a man
who wishes to buy the accessories (shirt, shoes, belt) to go along with
his new suit. Contrary to the commonsense view, the evidence supports
the contrast-principle prediction. As sales motivation analysts Whitney,
Hubin, and Murphy state, “The interesting thing is that even when a
man enters a clothing store with the express purpose of purchasing a
suit, he will almost always pay more for whatever accessories he buys
if he buys them after the suit purchase than before.”
It is much more profitable for salespeople to present the expensive
item first, not only because to fail to do so will lose the influence of the
contrast principle; to fail to do so will also cause the principle to work
actively against them. Presenting an inexpensive product first and fol-
lowing it with an expensive one will cause the expensive item to seem
even more costly as a result—hardly a desirable consequence for most
sales organizations. So, just as it is possible to make the same bucket of
water appear to be hotter or colder, depending on the temperature of
previously presented water, it is possible to make the price of the same
item seem higher or lower, depending on the price of a previously
presented item.
Clever use of perceptual contrast is by no means confined to clothiers.
I came across a technique that engaged the contrast principle while I
was investigating, undercover, the compliance tactics of real-estate
companies. To “learn the ropes,” I was accompanying a company realty
salesman on a weekend of showing houses to prospective home buyers.10 / Influence