It is both a personal bane and a professional blessing that whenever
I am confused by some aspect of human behavior, I feel driven to in-
vestigate further. In this instance, I was able to track down a fuller ac-
count of the story. Fortunately a journalist who had been as bewildered
as I was by the Ethiopians’ action had asked for an explanation. The
answer he received offers eloquent validation of the reciprocity rule:
Despite the enormous needs prevailing in Ethiopia, the money was
being sent because Mexico had sent aid to Ethiopia in 1935, when it was
invaded by Italy. So informed, I remained awed, but I was no longer
puzzled. The need to reciprocate had transcended great cultural differ-
ences, long distances, acute famine, and immediate self-interest. Quite
simply, a half century later, against all countervailing forces, obligation
triumphed.
Make no mistake, human societies derive a truly significant compet-
itive advantage from the reciprocity rule, and consequently they make
sure their members are trained to comply with and believe in it. Each
of us has been taught to live up to the rule, and each of us knows about
the social sanctions and derision applied to anyone who violates it. The
labels we assign to such a person are loaded with negativity—moocher,
ingrate, welsher. Because there is general distaste for those who take
and make no effort to give in return, we will often go to great lengths
to avoid being considered one of their number. It is to those lengths
that we will often be taken and, in the process, be “taken” by individuals
who stand to gain from our indebtedness.
To understand how the rule for reciprocation can be exploited by
one who recognizes it as the source of influence it certainly is, we might
closely examine an experiment performed by Professor Dennis Regan
of Cornell University.5 A subject who participated in the study found
himself rating, along with another subject, the quality of some paintings
as part of an experiment on “art appreciation.” The other rater—we can
call him Joe—was only posing as a fellow subject and was actually Dr.
Regan’s assistant. For our purposes, the experiment took place under
two different conditions. In some cases, Joe did a small, unsolicited favor
for the true subject. During a short rest period, he left the room for a
couple of minutes and returned with two bottles of Coca-Cola, one for
the subject and one for himself, saying, “I asked him [the experimenter]
if I could get myself a Coke, and he said it was okay, so I bought one
for you, too.” In other cases, Joe did not provide the subject with a favor;
he simply returned from the two-minute break empty-handed. In all
other respects, however, Joe behaved identically.
Later on, after the paintings had all been rated and the experimenter
had momentarily left the room, Joe asked the subject to do him a favor.
He indicated that he was selling raffle tickets for a new car and that ifRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 15