But because it is so typically in our best interests to be consistent, we
easily fall into the habit of being automatically so, even in situations
where it is not the sensible way to be. When it occurs unthinkingly,
consistency can be disastrous. Nonetheless, even blind consistency has
its attractions.
First, like most other forms of automatic responding, it offers a
shortcut through the density of modern life. Once we have made up
our minds about an issue, stubborn consistency allows us a very appeal-
ing luxury: We really don’t have to think hard about the issue anymore.
We don’t have to sift through the blizzard of information we encounter
every day to identify relevant facts; we don’t have to expend the mental
energy to weigh the pros and cons; we don’t have to make any further
tough decisions. Instead, all we have to do when confronted with the
issue is to turn on our consistency tape, whirr, and we know just what
to believe, say, or do. We need only believe, say, or do whatever is
consistent with our earlier decision.
The allure of such a luxury is not to be minimized. It allows us a
convenient, relatively effortless, and efficient method for dealing with
complex daily environments that make severe demands on our mental
energies and capacities. It is not hard to understand, then, why automat-
ic consistency is a difficult reaction to curb. It offers us a way to evade
the rigors of continuing thought. And as Sir Joshua Reynolds noted,
“There is no expedient to which a man will not resort to avoid the real
labor of thinking.” With our consistency tapes operating, then, we can
go about our business happily excused from the toil of having to think
too much.
There is a second, more perverse attraction of mechanical consistency
as well. Sometimes it is not the effort of hard, cognitive work that makes
us shirk thoughtful activity, but the harsh consequences of that activity.
Sometimes it is the cursedly clear and unwelcome set of answers
provided by straight thinking that makes us mental slackers. There are
certain disturbing things we simply would rather not realize. Because
it is a preprogrammed and mindless method of responding, automatic
consistency can supply a safe hiding place from those troubling realiz-
ations. Sealed within the fortress walls of rigid consistency, we can be
impervious to the sieges of reason.
One night at an introductory lecture given by the transcendental
meditation (TM) program, I witnessed a nice illustration of how people
will hide inside the walls of consistency to protect themselves from the
troublesome consequences of thought. The lecture itself was presided
over by two earnest young men and was designed to recruit new46 / Influence