more reasonably priced model. Some proof of the effectiveness of this
procedure comes from a report in Sales Management magazine, reprinted
without comment in Consumer Reports:
If you were a billiard-table dealer, which would you advertise—the
$329 model or the $3,000 model? The chances are you would pro-
mote the low-priced item and hope to trade the customer up when
he comes to buy. But G. Warren Kelley, new business promotion
manager at Brunswick, says you could be wrong…. To prove his
point, Kelley has actual sales figures from a representative store….
During the first week, customers…were shown the low end of the
line…and then encouraged to consider more expensive mod-
els—the traditional trading-up approach…. The average table sale
that week was $550…. However, during the second week, custom-
ers…were led instantly to a $3,000 table, regardless of what they
wanted to see…and then allowed to shop the rest of the line, in
declining order of price and quality. The result of selling down
was an average sale of over $1,000.14
Given the remarkable effectiveness of the rejection-then-retreat
technique, one might think that there could be a substantial disadvant-
age as well. The victims of the strategy might resent having been
cornered into compliance. The resentment could show itself in a couple
of ways. First, the victim might decide not to live up to the verbal
agreement made with the requester. Second, the victim might come to
distrust the manipulative requester, deciding never to deal with him
again. If either or both of these events occurred with any frequency, a
requester would want to give serious second thought to the use of the
rejection-then-retreat procedure. Research indicates, however, that these
victim reactions do not occur with increased frequency when the rejec-
tion-then-retreat technique is used. Somewhat astonishingly, it appears
that they actually occur less frequently! Before trying to understand
why this is the case, let’s first look at the evidence.
A study published in Canada throws light on the question of
whether a victim of the rejection-then-retreat tactic will follow through
with the agreement to perform the requester’s second favor. In addition
to recording whether target persons said yes or no to the desired request
(to work for two unpaid hours one day in a community mental-health
agency), this experiment also recorded whether they showed up to
perform their duties as promised. As usual, the procedure of starting
with a larger request (to volunteer for two hours of work per week in
the agency for at least two years) produced more verbal agreement to
the smaller retreat request (76 percent) than did the procedure of asking
for the smaller request alone (29 percent). The important result, though,Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 35