a place of safety, presumably on another planet. Very little detail was
provided about the rescue except that the believers were to make
themselves ready for pickup by rehearsing certain passwords to be ex-
changed (“I left my hat at home.” “What is your question?” “I am my
own porter.”) and by removing all metal from their clothes—because
the wearing or carrying of metal made saucer travel “extremely danger-
ous.”
As Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter observed the preparations
during the weeks prior to the flood date, they noted with special interest
two significant aspects of the members’ behavior. First, the level of
commitment to the cult’s belief system was very high. In anticipation
of their departure from doomed Earth, irrevocable steps were taken by
the group members. Most had incurred the opposition of family and
friends to their beliefs but had persisted nonetheless in their convictions,
often when it meant losing the affections of these others. In fact, several
of the members were threatened by neighbors or family with legal ac-
tions designed to have them declared insane. In Dr. Armstrong’s case,
a motion was filed by his sister to have his two younger children taken
away. Many believers quit their jobs or neglected their studies to devote
full time to the movement. Some even gave or threw away their personal
belongings, expecting them shortly to be of no use. These were people
whose certainty that they had the truth allowed them to withstand
enormous social, economic, and legal pressures and whose commitment
to their dogma grew as each pressure was resisted.
The second significant aspect of the believers’ preflood actions was
a curious form of inaction. For individuals so clearly convinced of the
validity of their creed, they did surprisingly little to spread the word.
Although they did initially make public the news of the coming disaster,
there was no attempt to seek converts, to proselyte actively. They were
willing to sound the alarm and to counsel those who voluntarily respon-
ded to it, but that was all.
The group’s distaste for recruitment efforts was evident in various
ways besides the lack of personal persuasion attempts. Secrecy was
maintained in many matters—extra copies of the Lessons were burned,
passwords and secret signs were instituted, the contents of certain
private tape recordings were not to be discussed with outsiders (so
secret were the tapes that even longtime believers were prohibited from
taking notes of them). Publicity was avoided. As the day of disaster
approached, increasing numbers of newspaper, television, and radio
reporters converged on the group’s headquarters in the Keech house.
For the most part, these people were turned away or ignored. The most
frequent answer to their questions was, “No comment.” Although dis-
couraged for a time, the media representatives returned with a ven-Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 93