decision is buttressed by the pillars of public commitment. They require
their clients to write down an immediate weight-loss goal and show that
goal to as many friends, relatives, and neighbors as possible. Clinic
operators report that frequently this simple technique works where all
else has failed.
Of course, there’s no need to pay a special clinic in order to engage
a visible commitment as an ally. One San Diego woman described to
me how she employed a public promise to help herself finally stop
smoking:
I remember it was after I heard about another scientific study
showing that smoking causes cancer. Every time one of those
things came out, I used to get determined to quit, but I never could.
This time, though, I decided I had to do something. I’m a proud
person. It matters to me if other people see me in a bad light. So I
thought, “Maybe I can use that pride to help me dump this damn
habit.” So I made a list of all the people who I really wanted to
respect me. Then I went out and got some blank business cards
and I wrote on the back of each card, “I promise you that I will
never smoke another cigarette.”
Within a week, I had given or sent a signed card to everybody on the
list—my dad, my brother back East, my boss, my best girlfriend, my
ex-husband, everybody but one—the guy I was dating then. I was just
crazy about him, and I really wanted him to value me as a person. Be-
lieve me, I thought twice about giving him a card because I knew that
if I couldn’t keep my promise to him I’d die. But one day at the of-
fice—he worked in the same building as I did—I just walked up to him,
handed him the card, and walked away without saying anything.
Quitting “cold turkey” was the hardest thing I’ve ever done. There
must have been a thousand times when I thought I had to have a smoke.
But whenever that happened, I’d just picture how all of the people on
my list, especially this one guy, would think less of me if I couldn’t stick
to my guns. And that’s all it took. I’ve never taken another puff.
You know, the interesting thing is the guy turned out to be a real
schmuck. I can’t figure out what I saw in him back then. But at the time,
without knowing it, he helped me get through the toughest part of the
toughest thing I’ve ever had to do. I don’t even like him anymore. Still,
I do feel grateful in a way because I think he saved my life.
The Effort Extra
Yet another reason that written commitments are so effective is that
they require more work than verbal ones. And the evidence is clear that64 / Influence