the more effort that goes into a commitment, the greater is its ability to
influence the attitudes of the person who made it. We can find that
evidence quite close to home or as far away as the back regions of the
primitive world. For example, there is a tribe in southern Africa, the
Thonga, that requires each of its boys to go through an elaborate initi-
ation ceremony before he can be counted a man of the tribe. As with
many other primitive peoples, a Thonga boy endures a great deal before
he is admitted to adult membership in the group. Anthropologists
Whiting, Kluckhohn, and Anthony have described this three-month
ordeal in brief but vivid terms:
When a boy is somewhere between 10 and 16 years of age, he is
sent by his parents to “circumcision school,” which is held every
4 or 5 years. Here in company with his age-mates he undergoes
severe hazing by the adult males of the society. The initiation be-
gins when each boy runs the gauntlet between two rows of men
who beat him with clubs. At the end of this experience he is
stripped of his clothes and his hair is cut. He is next met by a man
covered with lion manes and is seated upon a stone facing this
“lion man.” Someone then strikes him from behind and when he
turns his head to see who has struck him, his foreskin is seized
and in two movements cut off by the “lion man.” Afterward he is
secluded for three months in the “yard of mysteries,” where he
can be seen only by the initiated.
During the course of his initiation, the boy undergoes six major
trials: beatings, exposure to cold, thirst, eating of unsavory foods,
punishment, and the threat of death. On the slightest pretext, he
may be beaten by one of the newly initiated men, who is assigned
to the task by the older men of the tribe. He sleeps without cover-
ing and suffers bitterly from the winter cold. He is forbidden to
drink a drop of water during the whole three months. Meals are
often made nauseating by the half-digested grass from the stomach
of an antelope, which is poured over his food. If he is caught
breaking any important rule governing the ceremony, he is severe-
ly punished. For example, in one of these punishments, sticks are
placed between the fingers of the offender, then a strong man
closes his hand around that of the novice, practically crushing his
fingers. He is frightened into submission by being told that in
former times boys who had tried to escape or who had revealed
the secrets to women or to the uninitiated were hanged and their
bodies burned to ashes.12
On the face of it, these rites seem extraordinary and bizarre. Yet, at
the same time, they can be seen to be remarkably similar in principleRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 65