participant in the group to be studied. So when I wanted to learn about
the compliance tactics of encyclopedia (or vacuum-cleaner, or portrait-
photography, or dance-lesson) sales organizations, I would answer a
newspaper ad for sales trainees and have them teach me their methods.
Using similar but not identical approaches, I was able to penetrate ad-
vertising, public-relations, and fund-raising agencies to examine their
techniques. Much of the evidence presented in this book, then, comes
from my experience posing as a compliance professional, or aspiring
professional, in a large variety of organizations dedicated to getting us
to say yes.
One aspect of what I learned in this three-year period of participant
observation was most instructive. Although there are thousands of
different tactics that compliance practitioners employ to produce yes,
the majority fall within six basic categories. Each of these categories is
governed by a fundamental psychological principle that directs human
behavior and, in so doing, gives the tactics their power. The book is
organized around these six principles, one to a chapter. The prin-
ciples—consistency, reciprocation, social proof, authority, liking, and
scarcity—are each discussed in terms of their function in the society
and in terms of how their enormous force can be commissioned by a
compliance professional who deftly incorporates them into requests
for purchases, donations, concessions, votes, assent, etc. It is worthy of
note that I have not included among the six principles the simple rule
of material self-interest—that people want to get the most and pay the
least for their choices. This omission does not stem from any perception
on my part that the desire to maximize benefits and minimize costs is
unimportant in driving our decisions. Nor does it come from any
evidence I have that compliance professionals ignore the power of this
rule. Quite the opposite: In my investigations, I frequently saw practi-
tioners use (sometimes honestly, sometimes not) the compelling “I can
give you a good deal” approach. I choose not to treat the material self-
interest rule separately in this book because I see it as a motivational
given, as a goes-without-saying factor that deserves acknowledgment
but not extensive description.
Finally, each principle is examined as to its ability to produce a distinct
kind of automatic, mindless compliance from people, that is, a willing-
ness to say yes without thinking first. The evidence suggests that the
ever-accelerating pace and informational crush of modern life will make
this particular form of unthinking compliance more and more prevalent
in the future. It will be increasingly important for the society, therefore,
to understand the how and why of automatic influence.
It has been some time since the first edition of Influence was published.Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / vii