good to anyone who could view these connections. By showcasing the
positive associations and burying the negative ones, we are trying to
get observers to think more highly of us and to like us more. There are
many ways we go about this, but one of the simplest and most pervasive
is in the pronouns we use. Have you noticed, for example, how often
after a home-team victory fans crowd into the range of a TV camera,
thrust their index fingers high, and shout, “We’re number one! We’re
number one!” Note that the call is not “They’re number one” or even
“Our team is number one.” The pronoun is “we,” designed to imply
the closest possible identity with the team.
Note also that nothing similar occurs in the case of failure. No televi-
sion viewer will ever hear the chant, “We’re in last place! We’re in last
place!” Home-team defeats are the times for distancing oneself. Here
“we” is not nearly as preferred as the insulating pronoun “they.” To
prove the point, I once did a small experiment in which students at
Arizona State University were phoned and asked to describe the out-
come of a football game their school team had played a few weeks
earlier. Some of the students were asked the outcome of a certain game
their team had lost; the other students were asked the outcome of a
different game—one their team had won. My fellow researcher, Avril
Thorne, and I simply listened to what was said and recorded the per-
centage of students who used the word “we” in their descriptions.
When the results were tabulated, it was obvious that the students had
tried to connect themselves to success by using the pronoun “we” to
describe their school-team victory—“We beat Houston, seventeen to
fourteen,” or “We won.” In the case of the lost game, however, “we”
was rarely used. Instead, the students used terms designed to keep
themselves separate from their vanquished team—“They lost to Mis-
souri, thirty to twenty,” or “I don’t know the score, but Arizona State
got beat.” Perhaps the twin desires to connect ourselves to winners and
to distance ourselves from losers were combined consummately in the
remarks of one particular student. After dryly recounting the score of
the home-team defeat—“Arizona State lost it, thirty to twenty”—he
blurted in anguish, “They threw away our chance for a national champi-
onship!”27
If it is true that, to make ourselves look good, we try to bask in the
reflected glory of the successes we are even remotely associated with,
a provocative implication emerges: We will be most likely to use this
approach when we feel that we don’t look so good. When-ever our
public image is damaged, we will experience an increased desire to re-
store that image by trumpeting our ties to successful others. At the same
time, we will most scrupulously avoid publicizing our ties to failingRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 151