Using the same strategy, but this time asking Columbus, Ohio, residents
to predict whether they would vote on Election Day, a team of research-
ers led by Anthony Greenwald were able to increase significantly the
turnout in a U.S. presidential election among those called.
Perhaps an even more crafty commitment technique has been de-
veloped recently by telephone solicitors for charity. Have you noticed
that callers asking you to contribute to some cause or another these
days seem to begin things by inquiring about your current health and
well-being? “Hello Mr./Ms. Targetperson,” they say. “How are you
feeling this evening?” Or, “How are you doing today?” The caller’s in-
tent with this sort of introduction is not merely to seem friendly and
caring. It is to get you to respond—as you normally do to such polite,
superficial inquiries—with a polite, superficial comment of your own:
“Just fine” or “Real good” or “I’m doing great, thanks.” Once you have
publicly stated that all is well, it becomes much easier for the solicitor
to corner you into aiding those for whom all is not well: “I’m glad to
hear that, because I’m calling to ask if you’d be willing to make a
donation to help out the unfortunate victims of…”
The theory behind this tactic is that people who have just asserted
that they are doing/feeling fine—even as a routine part of a sociable
exchange—will consequently find it awkward to appear stingy in the
context of their own admittedly favored circumstances. If all this sounds
a bit farfetched, consider the findings of consumer researcher Daniel
Howard, who put the theory to test. Dallas, Texas, residents were called
on the phone and asked if they would agree to allow a representative
of the Hunger Relief Committee to come to their homes to sell them
cookies, the proceeds from which would be used to supply meals for
the needy. When tried alone, that request (labeled the “standard solicit-
ation approach”) produced only 18 percent agreement. However, if the
caller initially asked, “How are you feeling this evening?” and waited
for a reply before proceeding to the standard approach, several note-
worthy things happened. First, of the 120 individuals called, most (108)
gave the customary favorable reply (“Good,” “Fine,” “Real well,” etc.).
Second, 32 percent of the people who got the “How are you feeling to-
night” question agreed to receive the cookie seller at their homes, nearly
twice the success rate of the standard solicitation approach. Third, true
to the consistency principle, almost everyone who agreed to such a
visit did, in fact, make a cookie purchase when contacted at home (89
percent).
To make sure that this tactic doesn’t generate its successes simply
because a solicitor who uses it seems more concerned and courteous
than one who doesn’t use it, Howard conducted another study. This
time callers began either with the question “How are you feeling this52 / Influence