The country—both physical and social—into which they were dropped
must have seemed dreadfully uncertain.
Ah, uncertainty—the right-hand man of the principle of social proof.
We have already seen that when people are uncertain, they look to the
actions of others to guide their own actions. In the alien, Guyanese en-
vironment, then, Temple members were very ready to follow the lead
of others. But as we have also seen, it is others of a special kind whose
behavior will be most unquestioningly followed—similar others. And
therein lies the awful beauty of the Reverend Jim Jones’s relocation
strategy. In a country like Guyana, there were no similar others for a
Jonestown resident but the people of Jonestown itself.
What was right for a member of the community was determined to
a disproportionate degree by what other community members—influ-
enced heavily by Jones—did and believed. When viewed in this light,
the terrible orderliness, the lack of panic, the sense of calm with which
these people moved to the vat of poison and to their deaths, seems more
comprehensible. They hadn’t been hypnotized by Jones; they had been
convinced—partly by him but, more important, also by the principle
of social proof—that suicide was correct conduct. The uncertainty they
surely felt upon first hearing the death command must have caused
them to look to those around them for a definition of the appropriate
response. It is particularly worth noting that they found two impressive
pieces of social evidence, each pointing in the same direction.
The first was the initial set of their compatriots, who quickly and
willingly took the poison drafts. There will always be a few such fanat-
ically obedient individuals in any strong-leader-dominated group.
Whether, in this instance, they had been specially instructed beforehand
to serve as examples or whether they were just naturally the most
compliant with Jones’s wishes is difficult to know. No matter; the psy-
chological effect of the actions of those individuals must have been
potent. If the suicides of similar others in news stories can influence
total strangers to kill themselves, imagine how enormously more com-
pelling such an act would be when performed without hesitation by
one’s neighbors in a place like Jonestown.
The second source of social evidence came from the reactions of the
crowd itself. Given the conditions, I suspect that what occurred was a
large-scale instance of the pluralistic ignorance phenomenon that fre-
quently infects onlookers at emergencies. Each Jonestowner looked to
the actions of surrounding individuals to assess the situation
and—finding seeming calm because everyone else, too, was surrepti-
tiously assessing rather than reacting—“learned” that patient turn taking
was the correct behavior. Such misinterpreted but nonetheless convin-
cing social evidence would be expected to result precisely in the ghastly116 / Influence