process is the same. Participants voluntarily write essays for attractive
prizes that they have only a small chance to win. But they know that
for an essay to have any chance of winning at all, it must include praise
for the product. So they find praiseworthy features of the product and
describe them in their essays. The result is hundreds of men in Korea
or hundreds of thousands of people in America who testify in writing
to the product’s appeal and who, consequently, experience that “magic-
al” pull to believe what they have written.
The Public Eye
One reason that written testaments are effective in bringing about
genuine personal change is that they can so easily be made public. The
prisoner experience in Korea showed the Chinese to be quite aware of
an important psychological principle: Public commitments tend to be
lasting commitments. The Chinese constantly arranged to have the pro-
Communist statements of their captives seen by others. A man who
had written a political essay the Chinese liked, for example, might find
copies of it posted around camp, or might be asked to read it to a pris-
oner discussion group, or even to read it on the camp radio broadcast.
As far as the Chinese were concerned, the more public the better. Why?
Whenever one takes a stand that is visible to others, there arises a
drive to maintain that stand in order to look like a consistent person.
Remember that earlier in this chapter we described how desirable good
personal consistency is as a trait; how someone without it could be
judged as fickle, uncertain, pliant, scatterbrained, or unstable; how
someone with it is viewed as rational, assured, trustworthy, and sound.
Given this context, it is hardly surprising that people try to avoid the
look of inconsistency. For appearances’ sake, then, the more public a
stand, the more reluctant we will be to change it.
An illustration of how public commitments can lead to doggedly
consistent further action is provided in a famous experiment performed
by a pair of prominent social psychologists, Morton Deutsch and Harold
Gerard. The basic procedure was to have college students first estimate
in their own minds the length of lines they were shown. At this point,
one sample of the students had to commit themselves publicly to their
initial judgments by writing them down, signing their names to them,
and turning them in to the experimenter. A second sample of students
also committed themselves to their first estimates, but they did so
privately by putting them on a Magic Writing Pad and then erasing
them by lifting the Magic Pad’s plastic cover before anyone could see
what they had written. A third set of students did not commit them-62 / Influence