rejection-then-retreat tactic—the ability to prompt its victims to agree
to further requests. Since the tactic uses a concession to bring about
compliance, the victim is likely to feel more satisfied with the arrange-
ment as a result. And it stands to reason that people who are satisfied
with a given arrangement are more likely to be willing to agree to further
such arrangements.
HOW TO SAY NO
When up against a requester who employs the rule for reciprocation,
you and I face a formidable foe. Whether by presenting us with an initial
favor or initial concession, the requester will have enlisted a powerful
ally in the campaign for our compliance. At first glance, our fortunes
in such a situation would appear dismal. We could comply with the
requester’s wish and, in so doing, succumb to the reciprocity rule. Or,
we could refuse to comply and thereby suffer the brunt of the rule’s
force upon our deeply conditioned feelings of fairness and obligation.
Surrender or suffer heavy casualties. Cheerless prospects indeed.
Fortunately, these are not our only choices. With the proper under-
standing of the nature of our opponent, we can come away from the
compliance battlefield unhurt and sometimes even better off than before.
It is essential to recognize that the requester who invokes the reciproc-
ation rule (or any other weapon of influence) to gain our compliance is
not the real opponent. Such a requester has chosen to become a jujitsu
warrior who aligns himself with the sweeping power of reciprocation
and then merely releases that power by providing a first favor or con-
cession. The real opponent is the rule. If we are not to be abused by it,
we must take steps to defuse its energy.
But how does one go about neutralizing the effect of a social rule like
that for reciprocation? It seems too widespread to escape and too strong
to overpower once it is activated. Perhaps the answer, then, is to prevent
its activation. Perhaps we can avoid a confrontation with the rule by
refusing to allow the requester to commission its force against us in the
first place. Perhaps by rejecting the requester’s initial favor or concession
to us, we can evade the problem. Perhaps; but then, perhaps not. Invari-
ably declining the requester’s initial offer of a favor or sacrifice works
better in theory than in practice. The major problem is that when it is
first presented, it is difficult to know whether such an offer is honest
or whether it is the initial step in an exploitation attempt. If we always
assume the worst, it would not be possible to receive the benefits of
any legitimate favors or concessions offered by individuals who had
no intention of exploiting the reciprocity rule.
I have a colleague who remembers with anger how his ten-year-old38 / Influence