field as well. Although the number of possible examples is large, let’s
examine a pair of familiar ones deriving from the “free sample.” As a
marketing technique, the free sample has a long and effective history.
In most instances, a small amount of the relevant product is provided
to potential customers for the stated purpose of allowing them to try it
to see if they like it. And certainly this is a legitimate desire of the
manufacturer—to expose the public to the qualities of the product. The
beauty of the free sample, however, is that it is also a gift and, as such,
can engage the reciprocity rule. In true jujitsu fashion, the promoter
who gives free samples can release the natural indebting force inherent
in a gift while innocently appearing to have only the intention to inform.
A favorite place for free samples is the supermarket, where customers
are frequently provided with small cubes of a certain variety of cheese
or meat to try. Many people find it difficult to accept a sample from the
always-smiling attendant, return only the toothpick, and walk away.
Instead, they buy some of the product, even if they might not have liked
it especially well. A highly effective variation on this marketing proced-
ure is illustrated in the case, cited by Vance Packard in The Hidden Per-
suaders, of the Indiana supermarket operator who sold an astounding
one thousand pounds of cheese in a few hours one day by putting out
the cheese and inviting customers to cut off slivers for themselves as
free samples.
A different version of the free-sample tactic is used by the Amway
Corporation, a rapid-growth company that manufactures and distributes
household and personal-care products in a vast national network of
door-to-door neighborhood sales. The company, which has grown from
a basement-run operation a few years ago to a one-and-a-half-billion-
dollar-yearly-sales business, makes use of the free sample in a device
called the BUG. The BUG consists of a collection of Amway
products—bottles of furniture polish, detergent, or shampoo, spray
containers of deodorizers, insect killers, or window cleaners—carried
to the customer’s home in a specially designed tray or just a polyethyl-
ene bag. The confidential Amway Career Manual then instructs the
salesperson to leave the BUG with the customer “for 24, 48, or 72 hours,
at no cost or obligation to her. Just tell her you would like her to try the
products…. That’s an offer no one can refuse.” At the end of the trial
period, the Amway representative returns and picks up orders for those
of the products the customer wishes to purchase. Since few customers
use up the entire contents of even one of the product containers in such
a short time, the salesperson may then take the remaining product
portions in the BUG to the next potential customer down the line or
across the street and start the process again. Many Amway representat-
ives have several BUGs circulating in their districts at one time.20 / Influence