daughter’s feelings were terribly hurt by a man whose method of
avoiding the jaws of the reciprocity rule was to refuse abruptly her
kindness. The children of her class were hosting an open house at school
for their grandparents, and her job was to give a flower to each visitor
entering the school grounds. But the first man she approached with a
flower growled at her, “Keep it.” Not knowing what to do, she extended
it toward him again only to have him demand to know what he had to
give in return. When she replied weakly, “Nothing. It’s a gift,” he fixed
her with a disbelieving glare, insisted that he recognized “her game,”
and brushed on past. The girl was so stung by the experience that she
could not approach anyone else and had to be removed from her assign-
ment—one she had anticipated fondly. It is hard to know whom to
blame more here, the insensitive man or the exploiters who had abused
his mechanical tendency to reciprocate a gift until his response had
soured to a mechanical refusal. No matter whom you find more
blameworthy, the lesson is clear. We will always encounter authentically
generous individuals as well as many people who try to play fairly by
the reciprocity rule rather than to exploit it. They will doubtless become
insulted by someone who consistently rejects their efforts; social friction
and isolation could well result. A policy of blanket rejection, then, seems
ill advised.
Another solution holds more promise. It advises us to accept the de-
sirable first offers of others but to accept those offers only for what they
fundamentally are, not for what they are represented to be. If a person
offers us a nice favor, let’s say, we might well accept, recognizing that
we have obligated ourselves to a return favor sometime in the future.
To engage in this sort of arrangement with another is not to be exploited
by that person through the rule for reciprocation. Quite the contrary;
it is to participate fairly in the “honored network of obligation” that
has served us so well, both individually and societally, from the dawn
of humanity. However, if the initial favor turns out to be a device, a
trick, an artifice designed specifically to stimulate our compliance with
a larger return favor, that is a different story. Here our partner is not a
benefactor but a profiteer. And it is here that we should respond to his
action on precisely those terms. Once we have determined that his initial
offer was not a favor but a compliance tactic, we need only react to it
accordingly to be free of its influence. As long as we perceive and define
his action as a compliance device instead of a favor, he no longer has
the reciprocation rule as an ally: The rule says that favors are to be met
with favors; it does not require that tricks be met with favors.
A practical example may make things more concrete. Let’s suppose
that a woman phoned one day and introduced herself as a member ofRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 39