As the time appointed for their departure grew very close, the believ-
ers settled into a lull of soundless anticipation. With trained scientists
on site, we are afforded a detailed account of the events that transpired
during this momentous period in the life of the group:
The last ten minutes were tense ones for the group in the living
room. They had nothing to do but sit and wait, their coats in their
laps. In the tense silence two clocks ticked loudly, one about ten
minutes faster than the other. When the faster of the two pointed
to twelve-five, one of the observers remarked aloud on the fact. A
chorus of people replied that midnight had not yet come. Bob
Eastman affirmed that the slower clock was correct; he had set it
himself only that afternoon. It showed only four minutes before
midnight.
These four minutes passed in complete silence except for a single
utterance. When the [slower] clock on the mantel showed only one
minute remaining before the guide to the saucer was due, Marian
exclaimed in a strained, high-pitched voice: “And not a plan has
gone astray!” The clock chimed twelve, each stroke painfully clear
in the expectant hush. The believers sat motionless.
One might have expected some visible reaction. Midnight had
passed and nothing had happened. The cataclysm itself was less
than seven hours away. But there was little to see in the reactions
of the people in that room. There was no talking, no sound. People
sat stock-still, their faces seemingly frozen and expressionless. Mark
Post was the only person who even moved. He lay down on the
sofa and closed his eyes but did not sleep. Later, when spoken to,
he answered monosyllabically but otherwise lay immobile. The
others showed nothing on the surface, although it became clear
later that they had been hit hard.
Gradually, painfully, an atmosphere of despair and confusion
settled over the group. They reexamined the prediction and the
accompanying messages. Dr. Armstrong and Mrs. Keech reiterated
their faith. The believers mulled over their predicament and dis-
carded explanation after explanation as unsatisfactory. At one point,
toward 4 A.M., Mrs. Keech broke down and cried bitterly. She knew,
she sobbed, that there were some who were beginning to doubt
but that the group must beam light to those who needed it most
and that the group must hold together. The rest of the believers
were losing their composure, too. They were all visibly shaken and
many were close to tears. It was now almost 4:30 A.M., and still no
way of handling the disconfirmation had been found. By now, too,Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 95