something not because of any favorable feelings toward the item, but
because the purchase request had been presented in a way that drew
force from the reciprocity rule. It had not mattered that I do not like
chocolate bars; the Boy Scout had made a concession to me, click, and,
whirr, I responded with a concession of my own. Of course, the tendency
to reciprocate a concession is not so strong that it will invariably work
in all instances on all people; none of the weapons of influence con-
sidered in this book is that strong. However, in my exchange with the
Boy Scout, the tendency had been sufficiently potent to leave me in
mystified possession of a pair of unwanted and overpriced candy bars.
Why should I feel a strain to reciprocate a concession? The answer
rests once again in the benefit of such a tendency to the society. It is in
the interests of any human group to have its members working together
toward the achievement of common goals. However, in many social
interactions the participants begin with requirements and demands
that are unacceptable to one another. Thus the society must arrange to
have these initial, incompatible desires set aside for the sake of socially
beneficial cooperation. This is accomplished through procedures that
promote compromise. Mutual concession is one important such proced-
ure.
The reciprocation rule brings about mutual concession in two ways.
The first is obvious. It pressures the recipient of an already-made con-
cession to respond in kind. The second, while not so obvious, is pivotally
important. Just as in the case of favors, gifts, or aid, the obligation to
reciprocate a concession encourages the creation of socially desirable
arrangements by ensuring that anyone seeking to start such an arrange-
ment will not be exploited. After all, if there were no social obligation
to reciprocate a concession, who would want to make the first sacrifice?
To do so would be to risk giving up something and getting nothing
back. However, with the rule in effect, we can feel safe making the first
sacrifice to our partner, who is obligated to offer a return sacrifice.
Because the rule for reciprocation governs the compromise process,
it is possible to use an initial concession as part of a highly effective
compliance technique. The technique is a simple one that we can call
the rejection-then-retreat technique. Suppose you want me to agree to
a certain request. One way to increase your chances would be first to
make a larger request of me, one that I will most likely turn down. Then,
after I have refused, you would make the smaller request that you were
really interested in all along. Provided that you have structured your
requests skillfully, I should view your second request as a concession
to me and should feel inclined to respond with a concession of my own,28 / Influence