In the context of Liddy’s initial extreme requests, it seems that “a
quarter of a million dollars” had come to be “a little something” to be
left as a return concession. With the clarity afforded by hindsight, Ma-
gruder has recalled Liddy’s approach in as succinct an illustration of
the rejection-then-retreat technique as I have ever heard. “If he had
come to us at the outset and said, ‘I have a plan to burglarize and
wiretap Larry O’Brien’s office,’ we might have rejected the idea out of
hand. Instead he came to us with his elaborate call-girl/kidnap-
ping/mugging/sabotage/wiretapping scheme…. He had asked for the
whole loaf when he was quite content to settle for half or even a
quarter.”13
It is also instructive that, although he finally deferred to his boss’s
decision, only one member of the group, Frederick LaRue, expressed
any direct opposition to the proposal. Saying with obvious common
sense, “I don’t think it’s worth the risk,” he must have wondered why
his colleagues Mitchell and Magruder did not share his perspective. Of
course, there could be many differences between LaRue and the other
two men that may have accounted for their differing opinions regarding
the advisability of Liddy’s plan. But one stands out: Of the three, only
LaRue had not been present at the prior two meetings, where Liddy
had outlined his much more ambitious programs. Perhaps, then, only
LaRue was able to see the third proposal for the clunker that it was and
to react to it objectively, uninfluenced by the reciprocity and perceptual
contrast forces acting upon the others.
A bit earlier we said that the rejection-then-retreat technique had, in
addition to the reciprocity rule, a pair of other factors working in its
favor. We have already discussed the first of those factors, the percep-
tual contrast principle. The additional advantage of the technique is
not really a psychological principle, as in the case of the other two
factors; it is more of a purely structural feature of the request sequence.
Let’s once again say that I wish to borrow five dollars from you. By
beginning with a ten-dollar request, I really can’t lose. If you agree to
it, I will have gotten twice the amount from you I would have settled
for. If, on the other hand, you turn down my initial request, I can retreat
to the five-dollar favor that I desired from the outset and, through the
action of the reciprocity and contrast principles, greatly enhance my
likelihood of success. Either way, I benefit; it’s a case of heads I win,
tails you lose.
The clearest utilization of this aspect of the larger-then-smaller-request
sequence occurs in the retail-store sales practice of “talking the top of
the line.” Here the prospect is invariably shown the deluxe model first.
If the customer buys, there is frosting on the store’s cake. However, if
the customer declines, the salesperson effectively counteroffers with a34 / Influence