those of average or slightly above-average height, commonly wear lifts
in their shoes.
The other lesson is more general: The outward signs of power and
authority frequently may be counterfeited with the flimsiest of materials.
Let’s return to the realm of titles for an example—an example that in-
volves what, in several ways, is the scariest experiment I know. A group
of researchers, composed of doctors and nurses with connections to
three midwestern hospitals, became increasingly concerned with the
extent of mechanical obedience to doctors’ orders on the part of nurses.
It seemed to the researchers that even highly trained and skilled nurses
were not using that training or skill sufficiently to check on a doctor’s
judgment; instead, when confronted with a physician’s directives, they
would simply defer.
Earlier, we saw how this process accounted for the case of the rectally
administered ear drops. But the midwestern researchers took things
several steps further. First, they wanted to find out whether such cases
were isolated incidents or representative of a widespread phenomenon.
Second, they wanted to examine the problem in the context of a serious
treatment error—the gross overprescription of an unauthorized drug
to a hospital patient. Finally, they wanted to see what would happen
if they physically removed the authority figure from the situation and
substituted an unfamiliar voice on the phone, offering only the frailest
evidence of authority—the claimed title “doctor.”
To twenty-two separate nurses’ stations on various surgical, medical,
pediatric, and psychiatric wards, one of the researchers made an
identical phone call in which he identified himself as a hospital physician
and directed the answering nurse to give twenty milligrams of a drug
(Astrogen) to a specific ward patient. There were four excellent reasons
for a nurse’s caution in response to this order: (1) The prescription was
transmitted by phone, in direct violation of hospital policy. (2) The
medication itself was unauthorized; Astrogen had not been cleared for
use nor placed on the ward stock list. (3) The prescribed dosage was
obviously and dangerously excessive. The medication containers clearly
stated that the “maximum daily dose” was only ten milligrams, half of
what had been ordered. (4) The directive was given by a man the nurse
had never met, seen, or even talked with before on the phone. Yet, in
95 percent of the instances, the nurses went straightaway to the ward
medicine cabinet, where they secured the ordered dosage of Astrogen
and started for the patient’s room to administer it. It was at this point
that they were stopped by a secret observer, who revealed the nature
of the experiment.
The results are frightening, indeed. That 95 percent of regular staff
nurses complied unhesitatingly with a patently improper instruction168 / Influence