Suppose, though, we are confronted with an authority we determine
is a relevant expert. Before submitting to authority influence, it would
be wise to ask a second simple question: “How truthful can we expect
the expert to be here?” Authorities, even the best informed, may not
present their information honestly to us. Therefore we need to consider
their trustworthiness in the situation. In fact, most of the time, we do.
We allow ourselves to be much more swayed by experts who seem to
be impartial than by those who have something to gain by convincing
us; and this has been shown by research to be true around the world.13
By wondering how an expert stands to benefit from our compliance,
we give ourselves another safety net against undue and automatic in-
fluence. Even knowledgeable authorities in a field will not persuade
us until we are satisfied that their messages represent the facts faithfully.
When asking ourselves about such a person’s trustworthiness, we
should keep in mind a little tactic compliance practitioners often use
to assure us of their sincerity: They will seem to argue to a degree against
their own interests. Correctly done, this can be a subtly effective device
for proving their honesty. Perhaps they will mention a small shortcom-
ing in their position or product (“Oh, the disadvantages of Benson &
Hedges”). Invariably, though, the drawback will be a secondary one
that is easily overcome by more significant advantages—“Listerine, the
taste you hate three times a day”; “Avis: We’re number two, but we try
harder”; “L’Oréal, a bit more expensive and worth it.” By establishing
their basic truthfulness on minor issues, the compliance professionals
who use this ploy can then be more believable when stressing the im-
portant aspects of their argument.14
I have seen this approach used with devastating effect in a place that
few of us recognize as a compliance setting: the restaurant. It is no secret
that because of shamelessly low wages, servers in restaurants must
supplement their earnings with tips. Leaving the sine qua non of good
service aside, the most successful waiters and waitresses know certain
tricks for increasing tips. They also know that the larger a customer’s
bill, the larger the amount of money likely to come to them in a standard
gratuity. In these two regards, then—building the size of the customer’s
charge and building the percentage of that charge that is given as a
tip—servers regularly act as compliance agents.
Hoping to find out how they operate, I applied for waiter openings
at several fairly expensive restaurants. Without experience, though, the
best I could do was to land a busboy job that, as things turned out,
provided me a propitious vantage point from which to watch and
analyze the action. Before long, I realized what the other employees
already knew—that the most successful waiter in the place was Vincent,174 / Influence