because he had done her a small favor a month earlier? Or, more gen-
erally, why should it be that small first favors often stimulate larger
return favors? One important reason concerns the clearly unpleasant
character of the feeling of indebtedness. Most of us find it highly dis-
agreeable to be in a state of obligation. It weighs heavily on us and de-
mands to be removed. It is not difficult to trace the source of this feeling.
Because reciprocal arrangements are so vital in human social systems,
we have been conditioned to be uncomfortable when beholden. If we
were to ignore breezily the need to return another’s initial favor, we
would stop one reciprocal sequence dead and would make it less likely
that our benefactor would do such favors in the future. Neither event
is in the best interests of society. Consequently, we are trained from
childhood to chafe, emotionally, under the saddle of obligation. For
this reason alone, then, we may be willing to agree to perform a larger
favor than we received, merely to relieve ourselves of the psychological
burden of debt.
But there is another reason as well. A person who violates the reci-
procity rule by accepting without attempting to return the good acts of
others is actively disliked by the social group. The exception, of course,
is when the person is prevented from repayment by reasons of circum-
stance or ability. For the most part, however, there is a genuine distaste
for individuals who fail to conform to the dictates of the reciprocity
rule.8 Moocher and welsher are unsavory labels to be scrupulously
shunned. So undesirable are they that we will sometimes agree to an
unequal exchange in order to dodge them.
In combination, the reality of internal discomfort and the possibility
of external shame can produce a heavy psychological cost. When seen
in the light of this cost, it is not so puzzling that we will often give back
more than we have received in the name of reciprocity. Neither is it so
odd that, as was shown in an experiment conducted at the University
of Pittsburgh, people will often avoid asking for a needed favor if they
will not be in a position to repay it. The psychological cost may simply
outweigh the material loss.
The risk of still other kinds of losses may also persuade people to
decline certain gifts and benefits. Women frequently comment on the
uncomfortable sense of obligation they can feel to return the favors of
a man who has given them an expensive present or paid for a costly
evening out. Even something as small as the price of a drink can produce
a feeling of debt. A student in one of my classes expressed it quite
plainly in a paper she wrote: “After learning the hard way, I no longer
let a guy I meet in a club buy my drinks because I don’t want either of
us to feel that I am obligated sexually.” Research suggests that there is
a basis for her concern. If, instead of paying for them herself, a woman26 / Influence