themselves to positive events and separate themselves from negative
events—even when they have not caused the events. Some of the
strangest of such behavior takes place in the great arena of sports. The
actions of the athletes are not the issue here, though. After all, in the
heated contact of the game, they are entitled to an occasional eccentric
outburst. Instead, it is the often raging, irrational, boundless fervor of
the sports fan that seems, on its face, so puzzling. How can we account
for wild sports riots in Europe, or the murder of players and referees
by South American soccer crowds gone berserk, or the unnecessary
lavishness of the gifts provided by local fans to already wealthy
American ballplayers on the special “day” set aside to honor them?
Rationally, none of this makes sense. It’s just a game! Isn’t it?
Hardly. The relationship between sport and the earnest fan is anything
but gamelike. It is serious, intense, and highly personal. An apt illustra-
tion comes from one of my favorite anecdotes. It concerns a World War
II soldier who returned to his home in the Balkans after the war and
shortly thereafter stopped speaking. Medical examinations could find
no physical cause for the problem. There was no wound, no brain
damage, no vocal impairment. He could read, write, understand a
conversation, and follow orders. Yet he would not talk—not for his
doctors, not for his friends, not even for his pleading family.
Perplexed and exasperated, his doctors moved him to another city
and placed him in a veterans’ hospital where he remained for thirty
years, never breaking his self-imposed silence and sinking into a life of
social isolation. Then one day, a radio in his ward happened to be tuned
to a soccer match between his hometown team and a traditional rival.
When at a crucial point of play the referee called a foul against a player
from the man’s home team, the mute veteran jumped from his chair,
glared at the radio, and spoke his first words in more than three decades:
“You dumb ass!” he cried. “Are you trying to give them the match?”
With that, he returned to his chair and to a silence he never again viol-
ated.
There are two important lessons to be derived from this true story.
The first concerns the sheer power of the phenomenon. The veteran’s
desire to have his hometown team succeed was so strong that it alone
produced a deviation from his solidly entrenched way of life. Similar
effects of sports events on the long-standing habits of fans are far from
unique to the back wards of veterans’ hospitals. During the 1980 Winter
Olympics, after the U.S. hockey team had upset the vastly favored Soviet
team, the teetotaling father of the American goaltender, Jim Craig, was
offered a flask. “I’ve never had a drink in my life,” he reported later,
“but someone behind me handed me cognac. I drank it. Yes, I did.” Nor
was such unusual behavior unique to parents of the players. Fans out-148 / Influence