unsuspecting vacationers—as it frequently does—it results in an
enormous profit margin. And even when it is not initially successful,
she can mark the article “Reduced from _____” and sell it at its original
price while still taking advantage of the “expensive = good” reaction
to the inflated figure.
By no means is my friend original in this last use of the “expensive
= good” rule to snare those seeking a bargain. Culturist and author Leo
Rosten gives the example of the Drubeck brothers, Sid and Harry, who
owned a men’s tailor shop in Rosten’s neighborhood while he was
growing up in the 1930s. Whenever the salesman, Sid, had a new cus-
tomer trying on suits in front of the shop’s three-sided mirror, he would
admit to a hearing problem, and, as they talked, he would repeatedly
request that the man speak more loudly to him. Once the customer had
found a suit he liked and had asked for the price, Sid would call to his
brother, the head tailor, at the back of the room, “Harry, how much for
this suit?” Looking up from his work—and greatly exaggerating the
suit’s true price—Harry would call back, “For that beautiful all-wool
suit, forty-two dollars.” Pretending not to have heard and cupping his
hand to his ear, Sid would ask again. Once more Harry would reply,
“Forty-two dollars.” At this point, Sid would turn to the customer and
report, “He says twenty-two dollars.” Many a man would hurry to buy
the suit and scramble out of the shop with his “expensive = good”
bargain before Poor Sid discovered the “mistake.”
There are several components shared by most of the weapons of
automatic influence to be described in this book. We have already dis-
cussed two of them—the nearly mechanical process by which the power
within these weapons can be activated, and the consequent exploitability
of this power by anyone who knows how to trigger them. A third
component involves the way that the weapons of automatic influence
lend their force to those who use them. It’s not that the weapons, like
a set of heavy clubs, provide a conspicuous arsenal to be used by one
person to bludgeon another into submission.
The process is much more sophisticated and subtle. With proper ex-
ecution, the exploiters need hardly strain a muscle to get their way. All
that is required is to trigger the great stores of influence that already
exist in the situation and direct them toward the intended target. In this
sense, the approach is not unlike that of the Japanese martial-art form
called jujitsu. A woman employing jujitsu would utilize her own
strength only minimally against an opponent. Instead, she would exploit
the power inherent in such naturally present principles as gravity,
leverage, momentum, and inertia. If she knows how and where to en-
gage the action of these principles, she can easily defeat a physically8 / Influence