inches wide—no more, no less; the cloth is heavy and substantial, even
in July; the tones are muted, business blue, business gray, business
black.
He explains to his intended victim—perhaps a widow he secretly
followed home from the bank a day or two earlier—that he is a profes-
sional bank examiner who, in the course of auditing the books of her
bank, has found some seeming irregularities. He thinks he has spotted
the culprit, a bank officer who is regularly doctoring reports of transac-
tions in certain accounts. He says that the widow’s account may be one
of these, but he can’t be sure until he has hard evidence. Therefore, he
has come to ask for her cooperation. Would she help out by withdrawing
her savings so a team of examiners and responsible bank officials can
trace the record of the transaction as it passes across the suspect’s desk?
Often the appearance and presentation of the “bank examiner” are
so impressive that the victim never thinks to check on their validity
with even a simple phone call. Instead, she drives to the bank, with-
draws all her money, and returns home with it to wait with the “exam-
iner” for word on the success of the trap. When the message comes, it
is delivered by a uniformed bank guard, who arrives after closing hours
to announce that all is well—apparently the widow’s account was not
one of those being tampered with. Greatly relieved, the “examiner”
offers gracious thanks and, since the bank is now conveniently closed,
instructs the guard to return the lady’s money to the vault, to save her
the trouble of doing so the next day. With smiles and handshakes all
around, the guard takes the funds and leaves the “examiner” to express
a few more minutes of thanks before he, too, exits. Naturally, as the
victim eventually discovers, the “guard” is no more a guard than the
“examiner” is an examiner. What they are is a pair of bunco artists who
have recognized the capacity of carefully counterfeited uniforms to
click us into mesmerized compliance with “authority.”
Trappings
Aside from its function in uniforms, clothing can symbolize a more
generalized type of authority when it serves an ornamental purpose.
Finely styled and expensive clothes carry an aura of status and position,
as do trappings such as jewelry and cars. The last of these status symbols
is particularly interesting in the United States, where “the American
love affair with the automobile” gives it unusual significance.
According to the findings of a study done in the San Francisco Bay
area, owners of prestige autos receive a special kind of deference from
us. The experimenters discovered that motorists would wait significantly
longer before honking their horns at a new, luxury car stopped in frontRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 171