from his benefactor, seemingly about to break free, only to be drawn
back again by the pull of the rule. Once more his body tilts away, but
it’s no use; he cannot disengage. With a nod of resignation, he fishes in
his pocket and comes up with a dollar or two that is graciously accepted.
Now he can walk away freely, and he does, “gift” in hand, until he en-
counters a waste container—where he throws the flower.
Purely by accident, I happened to witness a scene that demonstrates
that the Krishnas know very well how frequently their gifts are un-
wanted by the people who receive them. While spending a day ob-
serving a soliciting Krishna group at Chicago’s O’Hare International
Airport a few years ago, I noticed that one of the group members would
frequently leave the central area and return with more flowers to resup-
ply her companions. As it happened, I had decided to take a break just
as she was leaving on one of her supply missions. Having nowhere to
go, I followed. Her journey turned out to be a garbage route. She went
from trash can to trash can beyond the immediate area to retrieve all
the flowers that had been discarded by Krishna targets. She then re-
turned with the cache of recovered flowers (some that had been recycled
who knows how many times) and distributed them to be profitably
cycled through the reciprocation process once more. The thing that
really impressed me about all this was that most of the discarded flowers
had brought donations from the people who had cast them away. The
nature of the reciprocity rule is such that a gift so unwanted that it was
jettisoned at the first opportunity had nonetheless been effective and
exploitable.
The ability of uninvited gifts to produce feelings of obligation is re-
cognized by a variety of organizations besides the Krishnas. How many
times have each of us received small gifts through the mail—personal-
ized address labels, greeting cards, key rings—from charity agencies
that ask for funds in an accompanying note? I have received five in just
the past year, two from disabled veterans’ groups and the others from
missionary schools or hospitals. In each case, there was a common
thread in the accompanying message. The goods that were enclosed
were to be considered a gift from the organization; and any money I
wished to send should not be regarded as payment but rather as a return
offering. As the letter from one of the missionary programs stated, the
packet of greeting cards I had been sent was not to be directly paid for,
but was designed “to encourage your kindness.” If we look past the
obvious tax advantage, we can see a reason why it would be beneficial
for the organization to have the cards viewed as a gift instead of mer-
chandise: There is a strong cultural pressure to reciprocate a gift, even
an unwanted one; but there is no such pressure to purchase an unwanted
commercial product.24 / Influence