All callers were admitted, all questions were answered, attempts were
made to proselyte all such visitors. The members’ unprecedented will-
ingness to accommodate possible new recruits was perhaps best dem-
onstrated when nine high-school students arrived on the following
night to speak with Mrs. Keech.
They found her at the telephone deep in a discussion of flying
saucers with a caller whom, it later turned out, she believed to be
a spaceman. Eager to continue talking to him and at the same time
anxious to keep her new guests, Marian simply included them in
the conversation and, for more than an hour, chatted alternately
with her guests in the living room and the “spaceman” on the
other end of the telephone. So intent was she on proselyting that
she seemed unable to let any opportunity go by.
To what can we attribute the believers’ radical turnabout? In the space
of a few hours, they went from clannish and taciturn hoarders of the
Word to expansive and eager disseminators of it. And what could have
possessed them to choose such an ill-timed instant—when the failure
of the flood was likely to cause nonbelievers to view the group and its
dogma as laughable?
The crucial event occurred sometime during “the night of the flood,”
when it became increasingly clear that the prophecy would not be ful-
filled. Oddly, it was not their prior certainty that drove the members
to propagate the faith; it was an encroaching sense of uncertainty. It
was the dawning realization that if the spaceship and flood predictions
were wrong, so might be the entire belief system on which they rested.
For those huddled in the Keech living room, that growing possibility
must have seemed hideous.
The group members had gone too far, given up too much for their
beliefs to see them destroyed; the shame, the economic cost, the mockery
would be too great to bear. The overarching need of the cultists to cling
to those beliefs seeps poignantly from their own words: From a young
woman with a three-year-old child:
I have to believe the flood is coming on the twenty-first because
I’ve spent all my money. I quit my job, I quit computer school…. I
have to believe.
And from Dr. Armstrong to one of the researchers four hours after
the failure of the saucermen to arrive:
I’ve had to go a long way. I’ve given up just about everything. I’ve
cut every tie. I’ve burned every bridge. I’ve turned my back on theRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 97