college students, a man was introduced as a visitor from Cambridge
University in England. However, his status at Cambridge was repres-
ented differently in each of the classes. To one class, he was presented
as a student; to a second class, a demonstrator; to another, a lecturer;
to yet another, a senior lecturer; to a fifth, a professor. After he left the
room, each class was asked to estimate his height. It was found that
with each increase in status, the same man grew in perceived height by
an average of a half inch, so that as the “professor” he was seen as two
and a half inches taller than as the “student.”5
It is worth the time of a small detour to pursue this interesting con-
nection between status and perceived size, since it shows up in a variety
of ways. In judging the size of coins, for example, children most overes-
timate the size of the more valuable coins. And adults are just as guilty
of such distortions. In one study, college students drew cards that had
monetary values printed on them ranging from $3.00 to –$3.00; they
won or lost the amount shown on the cards they picked. Afterward,
they were asked to rate the size of each card. Even though all cards
were exactly the same size, those that had the more extreme values—pos-
itive or negative—were seen as physically larger. Thus it is not neces-
sarily the pleasantness of a thing that makes it seem bigger to us, it is
its importance.6
Because we see size and status as related, it is possible for certain in-
dividuals to benefit by substituting the former for the latter. In some
animal societies, where the status of a male is assigned on the basis of
dominance, size is an important factor in determining which male will
achieve which status level in the group.7 Usually, in combat with a
rival, the larger and more powerful male wins. To avoid the harmful
effects to the group of such physical conflict, however, many species
have adopted methods that frequently involve more form than fracas.
The two males confront each other with showy aggression displays that
invariably include size-enhancing tricks. Various mammals arch their
backs and bristle their coats; fish extend their fins and puff themselves
up with water; birds unfurl and flutter their wings. Very often, this ex-
hibition alone is enough to send one of the histrionic warriors into re-
treat, leaving the contested status position to his seemingly larger and
stronger rival.
Fur, fins, and feathers. Isn’t it interesting how these most delicate of
parts can be exploited to give the impression of substance and weight?
There are two lessons for us here. One is specific to the association
between size and status. The connection of those two things can be
profitably employed by individuals who are able to fake the first to
gain the appearance of the second. This is precisely why con men, evenRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 167