gain the desired compliance from prisoners. Of course, the first problem
facing the Chinese was how to get any collaboration at all from the
Americans. These were men who were trained to provide nothing but
name, rank, and serial number. Short of physical brutalization, how
could the captors hope to get such men to give military information,
turn in fellow prisoners, or publicly denounce their country? The
Chinese answer was elementary: Start small and build.
For instance, prisoners were frequently asked to make statements so
mildly anti-American or pro-Communist as to seem inconsequential
(“The United States is not perfect.” “In a Communist country, unem-
ployment is not a problem.”). But once these minor requests were
complied with, the men found themselves pushed to submit to related
yet more substantive requests. A man who had just agreed with his
Chinese interrogator that the United States is not perfect might then be
asked to indicate some of the ways in which he thought this was the
case. Once he had so explained himself, he might be asked to make a
list of these “problems with America” and to sign his name to it. Later
he might be asked to read his list in a discussion group with other
prisoners. “After all, it’s what you really believe, isn’t it?” Still later he
might be asked to write an essay expanding on his list and discussing
these problems in greater detail.
The Chinese might then use his name and his essay in an anti-
American radio broadcast beamed not only to the entire camp, but to
other POW camps in North Korea, as well as to American forces in
South Korea. Suddenly he would find himself a “collaborator,” having
given aid to the enemy. Aware that he had written the essay without
any strong threats or coercion, many times a man would change his
image of himself to be consistent with the deed and with the new “col-
laborator” label, often resulting in even more extensive acts of collabor-
ation. Thus, while “only a few men were able to avoid collaboration
altogether,” according to Dr. Schein, “the majority collaborated at one
time or another by doing things which seemed to them trivial but which
the Chinese were able to turn to their own advantage…. This was par-
ticularly effective in eliciting confessions, self-criticism, and information
during interrogation.”3
If the Chinese know about the subtle power of this approach, it should
not be surprising that another group of people interested in compliance
is also aware of its usefulness. Many business organizations employ it
regularly.
For the salesperson, the strategy is to obtain a large purchase by
starting with a small one. Almost any small sale will do, because the
purpose of that small transaction is not profit. It is commitment. Further54 / Influence