and even in detail to the common initiation ceremonies of school fra-
ternities. During the traditional “Hell Week” held yearly on college
campuses, fraternity pledges must persevere through a variety of
activities designed by the older members to test the limits of physical
exertion, psychological strain, and social embarrassment. At week’s
end, the boys who have persisted through the ordeal are accepted for
full group membership. Mostly their tribulations have left them no
more than greatly tired and a bit shaky, although sometimes the negative
effects are more serious.
What is interesting is how closely the particular features of Hell Week
tasks match those of the tribal initiation rites. Recall that anthropologists
identified six major trials to be endured by a Thonga initiate during his
stay in the “yard of mysteries.” A scan of newspaper reports shows
that each trial also has its place in the hazing rituals of Greek-letter so-
cieties:
•Beatings. Fourteen-year-old Michael Kalogris spent three weeks in a
Long Island hospital recovering from internal injuries suffered during
a Hell Night initiation ceremony of his high-school fraternity, Omega
Gamma Delta. He had been administered the “atomic bomb” by his
prospective brothers, who told him to hold his hands over his head
and keep them there while they gathered around to slam fists into
his stomach and back simultaneously and repeatedly.
•Exposure to cold. On a winter night, Frederick Bronner, a California
junior-college student, was taken three thousand feet up and ten
miles into the hills of a national forest by his prospective fraternity
brothers. Left to find his way home wearing only a thin sweatshirt
and slacks, Fat Freddy, as he was called, shivered in a frigid wind
until he tumbled down a steep ravine, fracturing bones and hurting
his head. Prevented by his injuries from going on, he huddled there
against the cold until he died of exposure.
•Thirst. Two Ohio State University freshmen found themselves in the
“dungeon” of their prospective fraternity house after breaking the
rule requiring all pledges to crawl into the dining area prior to Hell
Week meals. Once locked in the house storage closet, they were given
only salty foods to eat for nearly two days. Nothing was provided
for drinking purposes except a pair of plastic cups in which they
could catch their own urine.
•Eating of unsavory foods. At Kappa Sigma house on the campus of the
University of Southern California, the eyes of eleven pledges bulged
when they saw the sickening task before them. Eleven quarter-pound
slabs of raw liver lay on a tray. Cut thick and soaked in oil, each was
to be swallowed whole, one to a boy. Gagging and choking re-66 / Influence