the only one I would have immediately open to me—compliance with
your second request.
Was that how the Boy Scout got me to buy his candy bars? Was his
retreat from the five-dollar request to the one-dollar request an artificial
one that was intentionally designed to sell candy bars? As one who has
still refused to discard even his first Scout merit badge, I genuinely
hope not. But whether or not the large-request-then-smaller-request
sequence was planned, its effect was the same, It worked. And because
it works, the rejection-then-retreat technique can and will be used pur-
posely by certain people to get their way. First let’s examine how this
tactic can be used as a reliable compliance device. Later we will see how
it is already being used. Finally we can turn to a pair of little-known
features of the technique that make it one of the most pervasively influ-
ential compliance tactics available.
Remember that after my encounter with the Boy Scout, I called my
research assistants together to try to understand what had happened
to me and, as it turned out, to eat the evidence. Actually, we did more
than that. We designed an experiment to test the effectiveness of the
procedure of moving to a desired request after a larger preliminary re-
quest had been refused. We had two primary purposes in conducting
the experiment. First, we wanted to see whether this procedure worked
on people besides myself. That is, it certainly seemed that the tactic had
been effective when tried on me earlier in the day; but then, I have a
history of falling for compliance tricks of all sorts. So the question re-
mained, Does the rejection-then-retreat technique work on enough
people to make it a useful procedure for gaining compliance? If so, it
would definitely be something to be aware of in the future.
Our second reason for doing the study was to determine how
powerful a compliance device the technique was. Could it bring about
compliance with a genuinely sizable request? In other words, did the
smaller request to which the requester retreated have to be a small re-
quest? If our thinking about what caused the technique to be effective
was correct, the second request did not actually have to be small; it only
had to be smaller than the initial one. It was our suspicion that the
critical thing about a requester’s retreat from a larger to a smaller favor
was its appearance as a concession. So the second request could be an
objectively large one—as long as it was smaller than the first re-
quest—and the technique would still work.
After a bit of thought, we decided to try the technique on a request
that we felt few people would agree to perform. Posing as representat-
ives of the “County Youth Counseling Program,” we approached college
students walking on campus and asked if they would be willing to
chaperon a group of juvenile delinquents on a day trip to the zoo. TheRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 29