took the form of experiments performed, for the most part, in my
laboratory and on college students. I wanted to find out which psycho-
logical principles influence the tendency to comply with a request. Right
now, psychologists know quite a bit about these principles—what they
are and how they work. I have characterized such principles as weapons
of influence and will report on some of the most important in the up-
coming chapters.
After a time, though, I began to realize that the experimental work,
while necessary, wasn’t enough. It didn’t allow me to judge the import-
ance of the principles in the world beyond the psychology building and
the campus where I was examining them. It became clear that if I was
to understand fully the psychològy of compliance, I would need to
broaden my scope of investigation. I would need to look to the compli-
ance professionals—the people who had been using the principles on
me all my life. They know what works and what doesn’t; the law of
survival of the fittest assures it. Their business is to make us comply,
and their livelihoods depend on it. Those who don’t know how to get
people to say yes soon fall away; those who do, stay and flourish.
Of course, the compliance professionals aren’t the only ones who
know about and use these principles to help them get their way. We
all employ them and fall victim to them, to some degree, in our daily
interactions with neighbors, friends, lovers, and offspring. But the
compliance practitioners have much more than the vague and amateur-
ish understanding of what works than the rest of us have. As I thought
about it, I knew that they represented the richest vein of information
about compliance available to me. For nearly three years, then, I com-
bined my experimental studies with a decidedly more entertaining
program of systematic immersion into the world of compliance profes-
sionals—sales operators, fund-raisers, recruiters, advertisers, and others.
The purpose was to observe, from the inside, the techniques and
strategies most commonly and effectively used by a broad range of
compliance practitioners. That program of observation sometimes took
the form of interviews with the practitioners themselves and sometimes
with the natural enemies (for example, police buncosquad officers,
consumer agencies) of certain of the practitioners. At other times it in-
volved an intensive examination of the written materials by which
compliance techniques are passed down from one generation to anoth-
er—sales manuals and the like.
Most frequently, though, it has taken the form of participant observa-
tion. Participant observation is a research approach in which the re-
searcher becomes a spy of sorts. With disguised identity and intent, the
investigator infiltrates the setting of interest and becomes a full-fledgedvi / Influence