purchases, even much larger ones, are expected to flow naturally from
the commitment. An article in the trade magazine American Salesman
put it succinctly:
The general idea is to pave the way for full-line distribution by
starting with a small order…. Look at it this way—when a person
has signed an order for your merchandise, even though the profit
is so small it hardly compensates for the time and effort of making
the call, he is no longer a prospect—he is a customer.4
The tactic of starting with a little request in order to gain eventual
compliance with related larger requests has a name: the foot-in-the-
door technique. Social scientists first became aware of its effectiveness
in the mid-1960s when psychologists Jonathan Freedman and Scott
Fraser published an astonishing set of data.5 They reported the results
of an experiment in which a researcher, posing as a volunteer worker,
had gone door to door in a residential California neighborhood making
a preposterous request of homeowners. The homeowners were asked
to allow a public-service billboard to be installed on their front lawns.
To get an idea of just how the sign would look, they were shown a
photograph depicting an attractive house, the view of which was almost
completely obscured by a very large, poorly lettered sign reading DRIVE
CAREFULLY. Although the request was normally and understandably
refused by the great majority (83 percent) of the other residents in the
area, this particular group of people reacted quite favorably. A full 76
percent of them offered the use of their front yards.
The prime reason for their startling compliance has to do with
something that had happened to them about two weeks earlier: They
had made a small commitment to driver safety. A different volunteer
worker had come to their doors and asked them to accept and display
a little three-inch-square sign that read BE A SAFE DRIVER. It was such a
trifling request that nearly all of them had agreed to it. But the effects
of that request were enormous. Because they had innocently complied
with a trivial safe-driving request a couple of weeks before, these
homeowners became remarkably willing to comply with another such
request that was massive in size.
Freedman and Fraser didn’t stop there. They tried a slightly different
procedure on another sample of homeowners. These people first re-
ceived a request to sign a petition that favored “keeping California
beautiful.” Of course, nearly everyone signed, since state beauty, like
efficiency in government or sound prenatal care, is one of those issues
almost no one is against. After waiting about two weeks, Freedman
and Fraser sent a new “volunteer worker” to these same homes to ask
the residents to allow the big DRIVE CAREFULLY sign to be erected onRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 55