But Marshall…not only admits his tricks…he seems to revel in
them. On one episode of his [then] top-rated Laverne and Shirley
series, for example, he says, “We had a situation where Squiggy’s
in a rush to get out of his apartment and meet some girls upstairs.
He says: ‘Will you hurry up before I lose my lust?’ But in the script
we put something even stronger, knowing the censors would cut
it. They did; so we asked innocently, well, how about ‘lose my
lust’? ‘That’s good,’ they said. Sometimes you gotta go at ’em
backward.”
On the Happy Days series, the biggest censorship fight was over
the word “virgin.” That time, says Marshall, “I knew we’d have
trouble, so we put the word in seven times, hoping they’d cut six
and keep one. It worked. We used the same pattern again with
the word ‘pregnant.’”12
I witnessed another form of the rejection-then-retreat technique in
my investigations of door-to-door sales operations. These organizations
used a less engineered, more opportunistic version of the tactic. Of
course, the most important goal for a door-to-door salesperson is to
make the sale. However, the training programs of each of the companies
I investigated emphasized that a second important goal was to obtain
from prospects the names of referrals—friends, relatives, or neighbors
on whom we could call. For a variety of reasons we will discuss in
Chapter 5, the percentage of successful door-to-door sales increases
impressively when the sales operator is able to mention the name of a
familiar person who “recommended” the sales visit.
Never as a sales trainee was I taught to get the sales pitch refused so
that I could then retreat to a request for referrals. In several such pro-
grams, though, I was trained to take advantage of the opportunity to
secure referrals offered by a customer’s purchase refusal: “Well, if it is
your feeling that a fine set of encyclopedias is not right for you at this
time, perhaps you could help me by giving me the names of some others
who might wish to take advantage of our company’s great offer. What
would be the names of some of these people you know?” Many indi-
viduals who would not otherwise subject their friends to a high-pressure
sales presentation do agree to supply referrals when the request is
presented as a concession from a purchase request they have just re-
fused.
We have already discussed one reason for the success of the rejection-
then-retreat technique—its incorporation of the reciprocity rule. This
larger-then-smaller-request strategy is effective for a pair of other
reasons as well. The first concerns the perceptual contrast principle weRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 31