who somehow arranged for patrons to order more and tip higher than
for anyone else; in fact, the other servers were not even close to him in
weekly earnings.
So I began to linger in my duties around Vincent’s tables to observe
his style. I quickly learned that his style was to have no single style. He
had a repertoire of them, each ready to be called on under the appropri-
ate circumstances. When the customers were a family, he was efferves-
cent—even slightly clownish—directing his remarks as often to the
children as to the adults. With a young couple on a date, he became
formal and a bit imperious in an attempt to intimidate the young man
(to whom he spoke exclusively) into ordering and tipping lavishly.
With an older, married couple, he retained the formality but dropped
the superior air in favor of a respectful orientation to both members of
the couple. Should the patron be dining alone, Vincent selected a
friendly demeanor—cordial, conversational, and warm.
But Vincent reserved the trick of seeming to argue against his own
interests for large parties of eight to twelve people. Here his technique
was veined with genius. When it was time for the first person, normally
a lady, to order, he went into his act. No matter what she selected,
Vincent reacted identically: His brow furrowed, his hand hovered above
his order pad, and after looking quickly over his shoulder for the
manager, he leaned conspiratorially toward the table to report for all
to hear, “I’m afraid that is not as good tonight as it normally is. Might
I recommend instead the____or the____?” (Here Vincent suggested a
pair of menu items that were fifty cents or so less expensive than the
dish the patron had selected initially.) “They are both excellent tonight.”
With this single maneuver, Vincent engaged several important prin-
ciples of influence. First, even those who did not take his suggestions
felt that Vincent had done them a favor by offering valuable information
to help them order. Everyone felt grateful, and consequently the rule
for reciprocity would work in his favor when it came time to decide on
his gratuity. But besides hiking the percentage of his tip, Vincent’s
maneuver also placed him in a favorable position to increase the size
of the table’s order. It established him as an authority on the current
stores of the house; he clearly knew what was and wasn’t good that
night. Moreover—and this is where seeming to argue against his own
interests came in—it proved him to be a trustworthy informant, because
he recommended dishes that were slightly less expensive than originally
ordered. Rather than trying to line his own pockets, he seemed to have
the customers’ best interests at heart.
To all appearances, he was at once knowledgeable and honest, a
combination that gave him great credibility. And Vincent was quick to
exploit the advantage of this credible image. When the party had fin-Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 175