geance when Dr. Armstrong’s religious activities caused him to be fired
from his post on the college health service staff; one especially persistent
newsman had to be threatened with a lawsuit. A similar siege was re-
pelled on the eve of the flood when a swarm of reporters pushed and
pestered the believers for information. Afterward, the researchers
summarized the group’s preflood stance on public exposure and recruit-
ment in respectful tones: “Exposed to a tremendous burst of publicity,
they had made every attempt to dodge fame; given dozens of opportun-
ities to proselyte, they had remained evasive and secretive and behaved
with an almost superior indifference.”
Eventually, when all the reporters and would-be converts had been
cleared from the house, the believers began making their final prepara-
tions for the arrival of the spaceship scheduled for midnight that night.
The scene, as viewed by Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter, must have
seemed like absurdist theater. Otherwise ordinary people—housewives,
college students, a high-school boy, a publisher, an M.D., a hardware-
store clerk and his mother—were participating earnestly in tragic
comedy. They took direction from a pair of members who were period-
ically in touch with the Guardians; Marian Keech’s written messages
from Sananda were being supplemented that evening by “the Bertha,”
a former beautician through whose tongue the “Creator” gave instruc-
tion. They rehearsed their lines diligently, calling out in chorus the re-
sponses to be made before entering the rescue saucer, “I am my own
porter.” “I am my own pointer.” They discussed seriously whether the
message from a caller identifying himself as Captain Video—a TV space
character of the time—was properly interpreted as a prank or a coded
communication from their rescuers. And they performed in costume.
In keeping with the admonition to carry nothing metallic aboard the
saucer, the believers wore clothing that had been cut open to allow the
metal pieces to be torn out. The metal eyelets in their shoes had been
ripped away. The women were braless or wore brassieres whose metal
stays had been removed. The men had yanked the zippers out of their
pants, which were supported by lengths of rope in place of belts.
The group’s fanaticism concerning the removal of all metal was
vividly experienced by one of the researchers who remarked, twenty-
five minutes before midnight, that he had forgotten to extract the zipper
from his trousers. As the observers tell it, “this knowledge produced a
near panic reaction. He was rushed into the bedroom where Dr. Arm-
strong, his hands trembling and his eyes darting to the clock every few
seconds, slashed out the zipper with a razor blade and wrenched its
clasps free with wire-cutters.” The hurried operation finished, the re-
searcher was returned to the living room a slightly less metallic but,
one supposes, much paler man.94 / Influence