Often the earlier arrival, inadvertently stoking the sense of rivalry,
would assert his right to primary consideration. “Just a minute, now.
I was here first.” If he didn’t assert that right, Richard would do it for
him. Addressing the second buyer, Richard would say, “Excuse me,
but this other gentleman was here before you. So can I ask you to wait
on the other side of the driveway for a few minutes until he’s finished
looking at the car? Then, if he decides he doesn’t want it or if he can’t
make up his mind, I’ll show it to you.”
Richard claims it was possible to watch the agitation grow on the
first buyer’s face. His leisurely assessment of the car’s pros and cons
had suddenly become a now-or-never, limited-time-only rush to decision
over a contested resource. If he didn’t decide for the car—at Richard’s
asking price—in the next few minutes, he might lose it for good to
that…that…lurking newcomer over there. For his part, the second
buyer would be equally agitated by the combination of rivalry and re-
stricted availability. He would pace on the periphery, visibly straining
to get at this now more desirable hunk of metal. Should two-o’clock
appointment number one fail to buy or even fail to decide quickly
enough, two-o’clock appointment number two was ready to pounce.
If these conditions alone were not enough to secure a favorable pur-
chase decision immediately, the trap snapped surely shut as soon as
the third two-o’clock appointment arrived on the scene. According to
Richard, stacked-up competition was usually too much for the first
prospect to bear. He would end the pressure quickly by either agreeing
to Richard’s price or by leaving abruptly. In the latter instance, the
second arrival would strike at the chance to buy out of a sense of relief
coupled with a new feeling of rivalry with that…that…lurking new-
comer over there.
All those buyers who contributed to my brother’s college education
failed to recognize a fundamental fact about their purchases: The in-
creased desire that spurred them to buy had little to do with the merits
of the car. That failure of recognition occurred for two reasons. First,
the situation Richard arranged for them produced an emotional reaction
that made it difficult for them to think straight. Second, as a con-
sequence, they never stopped to think that the reason they wanted the
car in the first place was to use it, not merely to have it. And the com-
petition-for-a-scarce-resource pressures Richard applied affected only
their desire to have the car in the sense of possessing it. Those pressures
did not affect the value of the car in terms of the real purpose for which
they had wanted it.
Should we find ourselves beset by scarcity pressures in a compliance
situation, then, our best response would occur in a two-stage sequence.202 / Influence