positive traits—beauty and desirability—to the cars. The advertiser is
betting that we will respond to the product in the same ways we respond
to the attractive models merely associated with it.
And they are right. In one study, men who saw a new-car ad that
included a seductive young woman model rated the car as faster, more
appealing, more expensive-looking, and better designed than did men
who viewed the same ad without the model. Yet when asked later, the
men refused to believe that the presence of the young woman had in-
fluenced their judgments.23
Because the association principle works so well—and so uncon-
sciously—manufacturers regularly rush to connect their products with
the current cultural rage. During the days of the first American moon
shot, everything from breakfast drink to deodorant was sold with allu-
sions to the U.S. space program. In Olympiad years, we are told precisely
which is the “official” hair spray and facial tissue of our Olympic
teams.24 During the 1970s, when the magic cultural concept appeared
to be “naturalness,” the “natural” bandwagon was crowded to capacity.
Sometimes the connections to naturalness didn’t even make sense:
“Change your hair color naturally,” urged one popular TV commercial.
The linking of celebrities to products is another way advertisers cash
in on the association principle. Professional athletes are paid to connect
themselves to things that can be directly relevant to their roles (sport
shoes, tennis rackets, golf balls) or wholly irrelevant (soft drinks, pop-
corn poppers, panty hose). The important thing for the advertiser is to
establish the connection; it doesn’t have to be a logical one, just a positive
one.
Of course, popular entertainers provide another form of desirability
that manufacturers have always paid dearly to tie to their goods. But
recently, politicians have caught on to the ability of a celebrity linkage
to sway voters. Presidential candidates assemble stables of well-known
nonpolitical figures who either actively participate in the campaign or
merely lend their names to it. Even at the state and local level, a similar
game is played. Take as evidence the comment of a Los Angeles woman
I overheard expressing her conflicting feelings about a California refer-
endum to limit smoking in public places. “It’s a real tough decision.
They’ve got big stars speaking for it, and big stars speaking against it.
You don’t know how to vote.”
If politicians are relative newcomers to the use of celebrity endorse-
ments, they are old hands at exploiting the association principle in
other ways. For example, congressional representatives traditionally
announce to the press the start of federal projects that will bring new
jobs or benefits to their home states; this is true even when a represent-Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 145