example, an Arizona State University research team that infiltrated the
Billy Graham organization reported on such advance preparations
prior to one of his Crusade visits. “By the time Graham arrives in town
and makes his altar call, an army of six thousand wait with instructions
on when to come forth at varying intervals to create the impression of
a spontaneous mass outpouring.”2
Advertisers love to inform us when a product is the “fastest-growing”
or “largest-selling” because they don’t have to convince us directly that
the product is good, they need only say that many others think so,
which seems proof enough. The producers of charity telethons devote
inordinate amounts of time to the incessant listing of viewers who have
already pledged contributions. The message being communicated to
the holdouts is clear: “Look at all the people who have decided to give.
It must be the correct thing to do.” At the height of the disco craze, cer-
tain discotheque owners manufactured a brand of visible social proof
for their clubs’ quality by creating long waiting lines outside when there
was plenty of room inside. Salesmen are taught to spice their pitches
with numerous accounts of individuals who have purchased the
product. Sales and motivation consultant Cavett Robert captures the
principle nicely in his advice to sales trainees: “Since 95 percent of the
people are imitators and only 5 percent initiators, people are persuaded
more by the actions of others than by any proof we can offer.”
Researchers, too, have employed procedures based on the principle
of social proof—sometimes with astounding results. One psychologist
in particular, Albert Bandura, has led the way in developing such pro-
cedures for the elimination of undesirable behavior. Bandura and his
colleagues have shown how people suffering from phobias can be rid
of these extreme fears in an amazingly simple fashion. For instance, in
an early study nursery-school-age children chosen because they were
terrified of dogs merely watched a little boy playing happily with a dog
for twenty minutes a day. This exhibition produced such marked
changes in the reactions of the fearful children that after only four days,
67 percent of them were willing to climb into a playpen with a dog and
remain confined there, petting and scratching it while everyone else
left the room. Moreover, when the researchers tested the children’s fear
levels again one month later, they found that the improvement had not
evaporated during that time; in fact, the children were more willing
than ever to interact with dogs.
An important practical discovery was made in a second study of
children who were exceptionally afraid of dogs: To reduce their fears,
it was not necessary to provide live demonstrations of another child
playing with a dog; film clips had the same effect. And the most effective
type of clips were those depicting not one but a variety of other children90 / Influence