Gouldner can report that there is no human society that does not sub-
scribe to the rule.2 And within each society it seems pervasive also; it
permeates exchanges of every kind. Indeed, it may well be that a de-
veloped system of indebtedness flowing from the rule for reciprocation
is a unique property of human culture. The noted archaeologist Richard
Leakey ascribes the essence of what makes us human to the reciprocity
system: “We are human because our ancestors learned to share their
food and their skills in an honored network of obligation,”3 he says.
Cultural anthropologists Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox view this “web of
indebtedness” as a unique adaptive mechanism of human beings, al-
lowing for the division of labor, the exchange of diverse forms of goods,
the exchange of different services (making it possible for experts to
develop), and the creation of a cluster of interdependencies that bind
individuals together into highly efficient units.4
It is the future orientation inherent in a sense of obligation that is
critical to its ability to produce social advances of the sort described by
Tiger and Fox. A widely shared and strongly held feeling of future ob-
ligation made an enormous difference in human social evolution, be-
cause it meant that one person could give something (for example, food,
energy, care) to another with confidence that it was not being lost. For
the first time in evolutionary history, one individual could give away
any of a variety of resources without actually giving them away. The
result was the lowering of the natural inhibitions against transactions
that must be begun by one person’s providing personal resources to
another. Sophisticated and coordinated systems of aid, gift giving, de-
fense, and trade became possible, bringing immense benefit to the soci-
eties that possessed them. With such clearly adaptive consequences for
the culture, it is not surprising that the rule for reciprocation is so deeply
implanted in us by the process of socialization we all undergo.
I know of no better illustration of how reciprocal obligations can
reach long and powerfully into the future than the perplexing story of
five thousand dollars of relief aid that was sent in 1985 between Mexico
and the impoverished people of Ethiopia. In 1985 Ethiopia could justly
lay claim to the greatest suffering and privation in the world. Its eco-
nomy was in ruin. Its food supply had been ravaged by years of drought
and internal war. Its inhabitants were dying by the thousands from
disease and starvation. Under these circumstances, I would not have
been surprised to learn of a five-thousand-dollar relief donation from
Mexico to that wrenchingly needy country. I remember my chin hitting
my chest, though, when a brief newspaper item I was reading insisted
that the aid had gone in the opposite direction. Native officials of the
Ethiopian Red Cross had decided to send the money to help the victims
of that year’s earthquakes in Mexico City.14 / Influence