of all. Thus a stamp carrying a three-eyed likeness of George Washington
is anatomically incorrect, aesthetically unappealing, and yet highly
sought after. There is instructive irony here: Imperfections that would
otherwise make for rubbish make for prized possessions when they
bring along an abiding scarcity.
With the scarcity principle operating so powerfully on the worth we
assign things, it is natural that compliance professionals will do some
related operating of their own. Probably the most straightforward use
of the scarcity principle occurs in the “limited-number” tactic, when
the customer is informed that a certain product is in short supply that
cannot be guaranteed to last long. During the time I was researching
compliance strategies by infiltrating various organizations, I saw the
limited-number tactic employed repeatedly in a range of situations:
“There aren’t more than five convertibles with this engine left in the
state. And when they’re gone, that’s it, ’cause we’re not making ’em
anymore.” “This is one of only two unsold corner lots in the entire de-
velopment. You wouldn’t want the other one; it’s got a nasty east-west
exposure.” “You may want to think seriously about buying more than
one case today because production is backed way up and there’s no
telling when we’ll get any more in.”
Sometimes the limited-number information was true, sometimes it
was wholly false. But in each instance, the intent was to convince cus-
tomers of an item’s scarcity and thereby increase its immediate value
in their eyes. I admit to developing a grudging admiration for the
practitioners who made this simple device work in a multitude of ways
and styles. I was most impressed, however, with a particular version
that extended the basic approach to its logical extreme by selling a piece
of merchandise at its scarcest point—when it seemingly could no longer
be had. The tactic was played to perfection in one appliance store I in-
vestigated, where 30 to 50 percent of the stock was regularly listed as
on sale. Suppose a couple in the store seemed from a distance to be
moderately interested in a certain sale item. There are all sorts of cues
that tip off such interest—closer-than-normal examination of the appli-
ance, a casual look at any instruction booklets associated with the ap-
pliance, discussions held in front of the appliance, but no attempt to
seek out a salesperson for further information. After observing the
couple so engaged, a salesperson might approach and say, “I see you’re
interested in this model here, and I can understand why; it’s a great
machine at a great price. But, unfortunately, I sold it to another couple
not more than twenty minutes ago. And, if I’m not mistaken, it was the
last one we had.”
The customers’ disappointment registers unmistakably. Because of
its lost availability, the appliance jumps suddenly in attractiveness.180 / Influence