the big fish’s teeth or gills. It is a beautiful arrangement: The big grouper
gets cleaned of harmful pests, and the cleaner fish gets an easy dinner.
The larger fish normally devours any other small fish foolish enough
to come close to it. But when the cleaner approaches, the big fish sud-
denly stops all movement and floats open-mouthed and nearly immobile
in response to an undulating dance that the cleaner performs. This
dance appears to be the trigger feature of the cleaner that activates the
dramatic passivity of the big fish. It also provides the saber-toothed
blenny with an angle—a chance to take advantage of the cleaning ritual
of the cooperators. The blenny will approach the large predator, copying
the undulations of the cleaner’s dance and automatically producing the
tranquil, unmoving posture of the big fish. Then, true to its name, it
will quickly rip a mouthful from the larger fish’s flesh and dart away
before its startled victim can recover.5
There is a strong but sad parallel in the human jungle. We too have
exploiters who mimic trigger features for our own brand of automatic
responding. Unlike the mostly instinctive response sequences of non-
humans, our automatic tapes usually develop from psychological
principles or stereotypes we have learned to accept. Although they vary
in their force, some of these principles possess a tremendous ability to
direct human action. We have been subjected to them from such an
early point in our lives, and they have moved us about so pervasively
since then, that you and I rarely perceive their power. In the eyes of
others, though, each such principle is a detectable and ready weapon—a
weapon of automatic influence.
There is a group of people who know very well where the weapons
of automatic influence lie and who employ them regularly and expertly
to get what they want. They go from social encounter to social encounter
requesting others to comply with their wishes; their frequency of success
is dazzling. The secret of their effectiveness lies in the way they structure
their requests, the way they arm themselves with one or another of the
weapons of influence that exist within the social environment. To do
this may take no more than one correctly chosen word that engages a
strong psychological principle and sets an automatic behavior tape
rolling within us. And trust the human exploiters to learn quickly exactly
how to profit from our tendency to respond mechanically according to
these principles.
Remember my friend the jewelry-store owner? Although she benefited
by accident the first time, it did not take her long to begin exploiting
the “expensive = good” stereotype regularly and intentionally. Now,
during the tourist season, she first tries to speed the sale of an item that
has been difficult to move by increasing its price substantially. She
claims that this is marvelously cost-effective. When it works on theRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 7