Of course, these predictions have invariably proved false. To the acute
dismay of the members of such groups, the end has never appeared as
scheduled.
But immediately following the obvious failure of the prophecy, history
records an enigmatic pattern. Rather than disbanding in disillusion, the
cultists often become strengthened in their convictions. Risking the ri-
dicule of the populace, they take to the streets, publicly asserting their
dogma and seeking converts with a fervor that is intensified, not dimin-
ished, by the clear disconfirmation of a central belief. So it was with the
Montanists of second-century Turkey, with the Anabaptists of sixteenth-
century Holland, with the Sabbataists of seventeenth-century Izmir,
with the Millerites of nineteenth-century America. And, thought a trio
of interested social scientists, so it might be with a doomsday cult based
in modern-day Chicago. The scientists—Leon Festinger, Henry Riecken,
and Stanley Schachter—who were then colleagues at the University of
Minnesota, heard about the Chicago group and felt it worthy of close
study. Their decision to investigate by joining the group, incognito, as
new believers and by placing additional paid observers among its ranks
resulted in a remarkably rich firsthand account of the goings-on before
and after the day of predicted catastrophe.5
The cult of believers was small, never numbering more than thirty
members. Its leaders were a middle-aged man and woman, whom the
researchers renamed, for purposes of publication, Dr. Thomas Arm-
strong and Mrs. Marian Keech. Dr. Armstrong, a physician on the staff
of a college student health service, had a long-held interest in mysticism,
the occult, and flying saucers; as such he served as a respected authority
on these subjects for the group. Mrs. Keech, though, was the center of
attention and activity. Earlier in the year she had begun to receive
messages from spiritual beings, whom she called the Guardians, located
on other planets. It was these messages, flowing through Marian Keech’s
hand via the device of “automatic writing,” that were to form the bulk
of the cult’s religious belief system. The teachings of the Guardians
were loosely linked to traditional Christian thought. No wonder that
one of the Guardians, Sananda, eventually “revealed” himself as the
current embodiment of Jesus.
The transmissions from the Guardians, always the subjects of much
discussion and interpretation among the group, gained new significance
when they began to foretell a great impending disaster—a flood that
would begin in the Western Hemisphere and eventually engulf the
world. Although the cultists were understandably alarmed at first,
further messages assured them that they and all those who believed in
the Lessons sent through Mrs. Keech would survive. Before the calamity,
spacemen were to arrive and carry off the believers in flying saucers to92 / Influence