MONKEY ME, MONKEY DO
A bit earlier we stated that the principle of social proof, like all other
weapons of influence, works better under some conditions than under
others. We have already explored one of those conditions: uncertainty.
Without question, when people are uncertain, they are more likely to
use others’ actions to decide how they themselves should act. But, in
addition, there is another important working condition: similarity. The
principle of social proof operates most powerfully when we are ob-
serving the behavior of people just like us. It is the conduct of such
people that gives us the greatest insight into what constitutes correct
behavior for ourselves. Therefore we are more inclined to follow the
lead of a similar individual than a dissimilar one.
That is why I believe we are seeing an increasing number of average-
person-on-the-street testimonials on TV these days. Advertisers now
know that one successful way to sell a product to ordinary viewers
(who compose the largest potential market) is to demonstrate that other
“ordinary” people like and use it. So whether the product is a brand of
soft drink, or a pain reliever, or a laundry detergent, we hear volleys
of praise from John or Mary Every-person.
More compelling evidence for the importance of similarity in determ-
ining whether we will imitate another’s behavior comes from scientific
research. An especially apt illustration can be found in a study done
several years ago by Columbia University psychologists. The researchers
placed wallets on the ground in various locations around midtown
Manhattan to observe what would happen when they were found. The
wallets all contained $2.00 in cash, a $26.30 check, and various inform-
ation providing the name and address of the wallet’s “owner.” In addi-
tion to this material, the wallet also contained a letter that made it
evident that the wallet had been lost not once, but twice. The letter was
written to the wallet’s owner from a man who had found it earlier and
whose intention was to return it. The finder indicated in his letter that
he was happy to help and that the chance to be of service in this way
had made him feel good.
It was evident to anyone who found one of these wallets that this
well-intentioned individual had then lost the wallet himself on the way
to the mailbox—the wallet was wrapped in an envelope addressed to
the owner. The researchers wanted to know how many people finding
such a wallet would follow the lead of the first finder and mail it, intact,
to the original owner. Before they dropped the wallets, however, the
researchers varied one feature of the letter it contained. Some of the
letters were written in standard English by what seemed to be an aver-Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 107