savings. The obvious but instructive point here is that we expect dis-
count coupons to do double duty. Not only do we expect them to save
us money, we also expect them to save us the time and mental energy
required to think about how to do it. In today’s world, we need the first
advantage to handle pocketbook strain; but we need the second advant-
age to handle something potentially more important—brain strain.
It is odd that despite their current widespread use and looming future
importance, most of us know very little about our automatic behavior
patterns. Perhaps that is so precisely because of the mechanistic, un-
thinking manner in which they occur. Whatever the reason, it is vital
that we clearly recognize one of their properties: They make us terribly
vulnerable to anyone who does know how they work.
To understand fully the nature of our vulnerability, another glance
at the work of the ethologists is in order. It turns out that these animal
behaviorists with their recorded “cheep-cheeps” and their clumps of
colored breast feathers are not the only ones who have discovered how
to activate the behavior tapes of various species. There is a group of
organisms, often termed mimics, that copy the trigger features of other
animals in an attempt to trick these animals into mistakenly playing
the right behavior tapes at the wrong times. The mimic will then exploit
this altogether inappropriate action for its own benefit.
Take, for example, the deadly trick played by the killer females of
one genus of firefly (Photuris) on the males of another firefly genus
(Photinus). Understandably, the Photinus males scrupulously avoid
contact with the bloodthirsty Photuris females. But through centuries
of experience, the female hunters have located a weakness in their
prey—a special blinking courtship code by which members of the vic-
tims’ species tell one another they are ready to mate. Somehow, the
Photuris female has cracked the Photinus courtship code. By mimicking
the flashing mating signals of her prey, the murderess is able to feast
on the bodies of males whose triggered courtship tapes cause them to
fly mechanically into death’s, not love’s, embrace.
Insects seem to be the most severe exploiters of the automaticity of
their prey; it is not uncommon to find their victims duped to death. But
less uncompromising forms of exploitation occur as well. There is, for
instance, a little fish, the saber-toothed blenny, that takes advantage of
an unusual program of cooperation worked out by members of two
other species of fish. The cooperating fish form a Mutt and Jeff team
consisting of a large grouper fish on the one hand and a much smaller
type of fish on the other. The smaller fish serves as a cleaner to the larger
one, which allows the cleaner to approach it and even enter its mouth
to pick off fungus and other parasites that have attached themselves to6 / Influence