the Home Fire Safety Association in your town. Suppose she then asked
if you would be interested in learning about home fire safety, having
your house checked for fire hazards, and receiving a home fire extin-
guisher, all free of charge. Let’s suppose further that you were interested
in these things and made an evening appointment to have one of the
Association’s inspectors come over to provide them. When he arrived,
he gave you a small hand extinguisher and began examining the possible
fire hazards of your home. Afterward, he gave you some interesting,
though frightening, information about general fire dangers, along with
an assessment of your home’s vulnerability. Finally, he suggested that
you get a home fire-warning system and left.
Such a set of events is not implausible. Various cities and towns have
nonprofit associations, usually made up of Fire Department personnel
working on their own time, that provide free home fire-safety inspec-
tions of this sort. Were these events to occur, you would clearly have
been done a favor by the inspector. In accordance with the reciprocation
rule, you should stand more ready to provide a return favor if you were
to see him in need of aid at some point in the future. An exchange of
favors of this kind would be in the best tradition of the reciprocity rule.
A similar set of events with, however, a different ending would also
be possible—in fact, more likely. Rather than leaving after recommend-
ing a fire-alarm system, the inspector would launch into a sales
presentation intended to persuade you to buy an expensive, heat-
triggered alarm system manufactured by the company he represented.
Door-to-door home fire-alarm companies will frequently use this ap-
proach. Typically, their product, while effective enough, will be over-
priced. Trusting that you will not be familiar with the retail costs of
such a system and that, if you decide to buy one, you will feel obligated
to the company that provided you with a free extinguisher and home
inspection, these companies will pressure you for an immediate sale.
Using this free-information-and-inspection gambit, fire-protection sales
organizations have flourished around the country.18
If you were to find yourself in such a situation with the realization
that the primary motive of the inspector’s visit was to sell you a costly
alarm system, your most effective next action would be a simple, private
maneuver. It would involve the mental act of redefinition. Merely define
whatever you have received from the inspector—extinguisher, safety
information, hazard inspection—not as gifts, but as sales devices, and
you will be free to decline (or accept) his purchase offer without even
a tug from the reciprocity rule: A favor rightly follows a favor—not a
piece of sales strategy. And if he subsequently responds to your refusal
by proposing that you, at least, give him the names of some friends he
might call on, use your mental maneuver on him again. Define his retreat40 / Influence