turquoise, they understandably relied on the old standby feature of
cost to determine the jewelry’s merits.
Although they probably did not realize it, by reacting solely to the
price feature of the turquoise, they were playing a shortcut version of
betting the odds. Instead of stacking all the odds in their favor by trying
painstakingly to master each of the things that indicate the worth of
turquoise jewelry, they were counting on just one—the one they knew
to be usually associated with the quality of any item. They were betting
that price alone would tell them all they needed to know. This time,
because someone mistook a “½” for a “2,” they bet wrong. But in the
long run, over all the past and future situations of their lives, betting
those shortcut odds may represent the most rational approach possible.
In fact, automatic, stereotyped behavior is prevalent in much of hu-
man action, because in many cases it is the most efficient form of behav-
ing, and in other cases it is simply necessary. You and I exist in an ex-
traordinarily complicated stimulus environment, easily the most rapidly
moving and complex that has ever existed on this planet. To deal with
it, we need shortcuts. We can’t be expected to recognize and analyze all
the aspects in each person, event, and situation we encounter in even
one day. We haven’t the time, energy, or capacity for it. Instead, we
must very often use our stereotypes, our rules of thumb to classify
things according to a few key features and then to respond mindlessly
when one or another of these trigger features is present.
Sometimes the behavior that unrolls will not be appropriate for the
situation, because not even the best stereotypes and trigger features
work every time. But we accept their imperfection, since there is really
no other choice. Without them we would stand frozen—cataloging,
appraising, and calibrating—as the time for action sped by and away.
And from all indications, we will be relying on them to an even greater
extent in the future. As the stimuli saturating our lives continue to grow
more intricate and variable, we will have to depend increasingly on
our shortcuts to handle them all.
The renowned British philosopher Alfred North Whitehead recog-
nized this inescapable quality of modern life when he asserted that
“civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can
perform without thinking about them.” Take, for example, the “ad-
vance” offered to civilization by the discount coupon, which allows
consumers to assume that they will receive a reduced purchase price
by presenting the coupon. The extent to which we have learned to op-
erate mechanically on that assumption is illustrated in the experience
of one automobile-tire company. Mailed-out coupons that—because of
a printing error—offered no savings to recipients produced just as much
customer response as did error-free coupons that offered substantialRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 5