normal street clothes; the rest of the time, he was dressed in a security
guard’s uniform. Regardless of the type of request, many more people
obeyed the requester when he wore the guard costume.
Especially revealing was one version of the experiment in which the
requester stopped pedestrians and pointed to a man standing by a
parking meter fifty feet away. The requester, whether dressed normally
or as a security guard, always said the same thing to the pedestrian:
“You see that guy over there by the meter? He’s overparked but doesn’t
have any change. Give him a dime!” The requester then turned a corner
and walked away so that by the time the pedestrian reached the meter,
the requester was out of sight. The power of his uniform lasted, how-
ever, even after he was long gone: Nearly all the pedestrians complied
with his directive when he had worn the guard costume, but fewer than
half did so when he had dressed normally. It is interesting to note that
later on, Bickman found college students able to guess with considerable
accuracy the percentage of compliance that had occurred in the experi-
ment when the requester wore street clothes (50 percent vs. the actual
42 percent); yet the students greatly underestimated the percentage of
compliance when he was in uniform (63 percent vs. the actual 92 per-
cent).10
Less blatant in its connotation than a uniform, but nonetheless effect-
ive, is another kind of attire that has traditionally bespoken authority
status in our culture: the well-tailored business suit. It, too, can evoke
a telling form of deference from total strangers. Research conducted in
Texas, for instance, arranged for a thirty-one-year-old man to violate
the law by crossing the street against the traffic light on a variety of
occasions. In half of the cases, he was dressed in a freshly pressed
business suit and tie; on the other occasions, he wore a work shirt and
trousers. The researchers watched from a distance and counted the
number of pedestrians waiting at the corner who followed the man
across the street. Like the children of Hamelin who crowded after the
Pied Piper, three and a half times as many people swept into traffic
behind the suited jaywalker. In this case, though, the magic came not
from his pipe but his pinstripes.11
It is noteworthy that the two types of authority apparel shown by
the above research to be influential—the guard uniform and business
suit—are combined deftly by confidence men in a fraud called the bank-
examiner scheme. The target of the swindle can be anyone, but elderly
persons living alone are preferred. The con begins when a man dressed
in a properly conservative three-piece business suit appears at the door
of a likely victim. Everything about his clothing sends a message of
propriety and respectability. The white shirt is starched; the wing-tip
shoes glow deeply. His suit is not trendy but classic: The lapels are three170 / Influence