evidence to date. When I talk to my students, or even my neighbors
and friends, about the prospects for cooperative learning approaches,
I can feel optimism rise in me. The public schools have for so long been
the source of discouraging news—sinking test scores, teacher burnout,
increasing crime, and, of course, racial conflict. Now there is at least
one crack in the gloom, and I find myself genuinely excited about it.
What’s the point of this digression into the effects of school desegreg-
ation on race relations? The point is to make two points. First, although
the familiarity produced by contact usually leads to greater liking, the
opposite occurs if the contact carries distasteful experiences with it.
Therefore, when children of different racial groups are thrown into the
incessant, harsh competition of the standard American classroom, we
ought to see—and we do see—the worsening of hostilities. Second, the
evidence that team-oriented learning is an antidote to this disorder may
tell us about the heavy impact of cooperation on the liking process.
But before we assume that cooperation is a powerful cause of liking,
we should first pass it through what, to my mind, is the acid test: Do
compliance practitioners systematically use cooperation to get us to
like them so we will say yes to their requests? Do they point it out when
it exists naturally in a situation? Do they try to amplify it when it exists
only weakly? And, most instructive of all, do they manufacture it when
it is absent?
As it turns out, cooperation passes the test with colors flying. Com-
pliance professionals are forever attempting to establish that we and
they are working for the same goals, that we must “pull together” for
mutual benefit, that they are, in essence, our teammates. A host of ex-
amples is possible. Most are familiar, like the new-car salesman who
takes our side and “does battle” with his boss to secure us a good deal.19
But one rather spectacular illustration occurs in a setting few of us
would recognize firsthand, because the professionals are police inter-
rogators whose job is to induce suspects to confess to crime.
In recent years, the courts have imposed a variety of restrictions on
the way police must behave in handling suspected criminals, especially
in seeking confessions. Many procedures that in the past led to admis-
sions of guilt can no longer be employed for fear that they will result
in a judge’s dismissal of the case. As yet, however, the courts have found
nothing illegal in the use by the police of subtle psychology. For this
reason, criminal interrogations have taken increasingly to the use of
such ploys as the one they call Good Cop/Bad Cop.
Good Cop/Bad Cop works as follows: A young robbery suspect, let’s
say, who has been advised of his rights and is maintaining his innocence,
is brought to a room to be questioned by a pair of officers. One of the140 / Influence