ical and appropriate way of behaving most of the time, we can’t decide
merely to eliminate it from our lives altogether. The results would be
disastrous. If, rather than whirring along in accordance with our prior
decisions and deeds, we stopped to think through the merits of every
new action before performing it, we would never have time to accom-
plish anything significant. We need even that dangerous, mechanical
brand of consistency. The only way out of the dilemma is to know when
such consistency is likely to lead to a poor choice. There are certain
signals—two separate kinds of signals, in fact—to tip us off. We register
each type in a different part of our bodies.
The first sort of signal is easy to recognize. It occurs right in the pit
of our stomachs when we realize we are trapped into complying with
a request we know we don’t want to perform. It has happened to me a
hundred times. An especially memorable instance, though, took place
on a summer evening well before I began to study compliance tactics.
I answered my doorbell to find a stunning young woman dressed in
shorts and a revealing halter top. I noticed, nonetheless, that she was
carrying a clipboard and was asking me to participate in a survey.
Wanting to make a favorable impression, I agreed and, I do admit,
stretched the truth in my interview answers so as to present myself in
the most positive light. Our conversation went as follows:
STUNNING YOUNG WOMAN: Hello, I’m doing a survey on the entertain-
ment habits of city residents, and I wonder if you could answer a few
questions for me.
CIALDINI: Do come in.
SYW: Thank you. I’ll just sit right here and begin. How many times per
week would you say that you go out to dinner?
C: Oh, probably three, maybe four times a week. Whenever I can, really;
I love fine restaurants.
SYW: How nice. And do you usually order wine with your dinner?
C: Only if it’s imported.
SYW: I see. What about movies? Do you go to the movies much?
C: The cinema? I can’t get enough of good films. I especially like the80 / Influence