That’s when she called me. I thought I knew what had happened but
told her that, if I were to explain things properly, she would have to
listen to a story of mine. Actually, it isn’t my story; it’s about mother
turkeys, and it belongs to the relatively new science of ethology—the
study of animals in their natural settings. Turkey mothers are good
mothers—loving, watchful, and protective. They spend much of their
time tending, warming, cleaning, and huddling the young beneath
them. But there is something odd about their method. Virtually all of
this mothering is triggered by one thing: the “cheep-cheep” sound of
young turkey chicks. Other identifying features of the chicks, such as
their smell, touch, or appearance, seem to play minor roles in the
mothering process. If a chick makes the “cheep-cheep” noise, its
mother will care for it; if not, the mother will ignore or sometimes kill
it.
The extreme reliance of maternal turkeys upon this one sound was
dramatically illustrated by animal behaviorist M. W. Fox in his descrip-
tion of an experiment involving a mother turkey and a stuffed polecat.1
For a mother turkey, a polecat is a natural enemy whose approach is
to be greeted with squawking, pecking, clawing rage. Indeed, the exper-
imenters found that even a stuffed model of a polecat, when drawn by
a string toward a mother turkey, received an immediate and furious
attack. When, however, the same stuffed replica carried inside it a small
recorder that played the “cheep-cheep” sound of baby turkeys, the
mother not only accepted the oncoming polecat but gathered it under-
neath her. When the machine was turned off, the polecat model again
drew a vicious attack.
How ridiculous a female turkey seems under these circumstances:
She will embrace a natural enemy just because it goes “cheep-cheep,”
and she will mistreat or murder one of her own chicks just because it
does not. She looks like an automaton whose maternal instincts are
under the automatic control of that single sound. The ethologists tell
us that this sort of thing is far from unique to the turkey. They have
begun to identify regular, blindly mechanical patterns of action in a
wide variety of species.
Called fixed-action patterns, they can involve intricate sequences of
behavior, such as entire courtship or mating rituals. A fundamental
characteristic of these patterns is that the behaviors that compose them
occur in virtually the same fashion and in the same order every time.
It is almost as if the patterns were recorded on tapes within the animals.
When the situation calls for courtship, the courtship tape gets played;
when the situation calls for mothering, the maternal-behavior tape gets2 / Influence