The Rule Can Trigger Unfair Exchanges
There is yet one other feature of the reciprocity rule that allows it to be
exploited for profit. Paradoxically, the rule developed to promote equal
exchanges between partners, yet it can be used to bring about decidedly
unequal results. The rule demands that one sort of action be reciprocated
with a similar sort of action. A favor is to be met with another favor; it
is not to be met with neglect, and certainly not with attack. But within
the similar-action boundaries, considerable flexibility is allowed. A
small initial favor can produce a sense of obligation to agree to a sub-
stantially larger return favor. Since, as we have already seen, the rule
allows one person to choose the nature of the indebting first favor and
the nature of the debt-canceling return favor, we could easily be manip-
ulated into an unfair exchange by those who might wish to exploit the
rule.
Once again, we can turn to the Regan experiment for evidence. Re-
member in that study that Joe gave one group of subjects a bottle of
Coca-Cola as an initiating gift and later asked all subjects to buy some
of his raffle tickets at twenty-five cents apiece. What I have so far neg-
lected to mention is that the study was done in the late 1960s, when the
price of a Coke was a dime. The average subject who had been given a
ten-cent drink bought two of Joe’s raffle tickets, although some bought
as many as seven. Even if we look just at the average subject, though,
we can tell that Joe made quite a deal. A 500 percent return on invest-
ment is respectable indeed!
But in Joe’s case, even a 500 percent return amounted to only fifty
cents. Can the reciprocity rule produce meaningfully large differences
in the sizes of the exchanged favors? Under the right circumstances, it
certainly can. Take, for instance, the account of a student of mine con-
cerning a day she remembers ruefully:
About one year ago, I couldn’t start my car. As I was sitting there,
a guy in the parking lot came over and eventually jump-started
the car. I said thanks, and he said you’re welcome; as he was
leaving, I said that if he ever needed a favor to stop by. About a
month later, the guy knocked on my door and asked to borrow
my car for two hours as his was in the shop. I felt somewhat oblig-
ated but uncertain, since the car was pretty new and he looked
very young. Later, I found out that he was underage and had no
insurance. Anyway, I lent him the car. He totaled it.
How could it happen that an intelligent young woman would agree
to turn over her new car to a virtual stranger (and a youngster at that)Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 25