bystander aid. Without ever having to resort to such sinister concepts
as “urban depersonalization” and “megalopolitan alienation,” then, we
can explain why so many instances of bystander inaction occur in our
cities.
Devictimizing Yourself
But explaining the dangers of modern urban life in less ominous terms
does not dispel them. And as the world’s populations move increasingly
to the cities—half of all humanity will be city dwellers within ten
years—there will be a growing need to reduce those dangers. Fortu-
nately, our newfound understanding of the bystander “apathy” process
offers real hope. Armed with this scientific knowledge, an emergency
victim can increase enormously the chances of receiving aid from others.
The key is the realization that groups of bystanders fail to help because
the bystanders are unsure rather than unkind. They don’t help because
they are unsure of whether an emergency actually exists and whether
they are responsible for taking action. When they are sure of their re-
sponsibilities for intervening in a clear emergency, people are exceed-
ingly responsive!
Once it is understood that the enemy is not some unmanageable so-
cietal condition like urban depersonalization but is, instead, the simple
state of uncertainty, it becomes possible for emergency victims to take
specific steps to protect themselves by reducing the bystanders’ uncer-
tainty. Imagine, for example, you are spending a summer afternoon at
a music concert in the park. As the concert ends and people begin
leaving, you notice a slight numbness in one arm but dismiss it as
nothing to be alarmed about. Yet, while moving with the crowd to the
distant parking areas, you feel the numbness spreading down to your
hand and up one side of your face. Feeling disoriented, you decide to
sit against a tree for a moment to rest. Soon you realize that something
is drastically wrong. Sitting down has not helped; in fact, the control
and coordination of your muscles has worsened to the point that you
are starting to have difficulty moving your mouth and tongue to speak.
You try to get up but can’t. A terrifying thought slashes to mind: “Oh,
God, I’m having a stroke!” Groups of people are passing by and most
are paying you no attention. The few who notice the odd way you are
slumped against the tree or the strange look on your face check the social
evidence around them and, seeing that no one else is reacting with
concern, walk on past convinced that nothing is wrong.
Were you to find yourself in such a predicament, what could you do
to overcome the odds against receiving help? Because your physical
abilities would be deteriorating, time would be crucial. If, before you104 / Influence