vory or unwelcome sales operators, disagreeable acquaintances, repres-
entatives of strange or unpopular organizations—can greatly increase
the chance that we will do what they wish merely by providing us with
a small favor prior to their requests. Let’s take an example that by now
many of us have encountered. The Hare Krishna Society is an Eastern
religious sect with centuries-old roots traceable to the Indian city of
Calcutta. But its spectacular modern-day story occurred in the 1970s,
when it experienced a remarkable growth not only in followers but also
in wealth and property. The economic growth was funded through a
variety of activities, the principal and still most visible of which is the
request for donations by Society members from passersby in public
places. During the early history of the group in this country, the solicit-
ation for contributions was attempted in a fashion memorable for anyone
who saw it. Groups of Krishna devotees—often with shaved heads,
and wearing ill-fitting robes, leg wrappings, beads, and bells—would
canvass a city street, chanting and bobbing in unison while begging for
funds.
Although highly effective as a technique for gaining attention, this
form of fund-raising did not work especially well. The average Amer-
ican considered the Krishnas weird, to say the least, and was reluctant
to provide money to support them. It quickly became clear to the Society
that it had a considerable public-relations problem. The people being
asked for contributions did not like the way the members looked,
dressed, or acted. Had the Society been an ordinary commercial organ-
ization, the solution would have been simple—change the things the
public does not like. But the Krishnas are a religious organization; and
the way members look, dress, and act is partially tied to religious factors.
Because, in any denomination, religious factors are typically resistant
to change because of worldly considerations, the Krishna leadership
was faced with a real dilemma. On the one hand were beliefs, modes
of dress, and hairstyles that had religious significance. On the other
hand, threatening the organization’s financial welfare, were the less-
than-positive feelings of the American public toward these things.
What’s a sect to do?
The Krishnas’ resolution was brilliant. They switched to a fund-raising
tactic that made it unnecessary for target persons to have positive feel-
ings toward the fund-raisers. They began to employ a donation-request
procedure that engaged the rule for reciprocation, which, as demon-
strated by the Regan study, is strong enough to overcome the factor of
dislike for the requester. The new strategy still involves the solicitation
of contributions in public places with much pedestrian traffic (airports
are a favorite), but now, before a donation is requested, the target person
is given a “gift”—a book (usually the Bhagavad Gita), the Back to GodheadRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 17