can state, “There is an obligation to give, an obligation to receive, and
an obligation to repay.”6
Although the obligation to repay constitutes the essence of the reci-
procity rule, it is the obligation to receive that makes the rule so easy
to exploit. The obligation to receive reduces our ability to choose whom
we wish to be indebted to and puts that power in the hands of others.
Let’s reexamine a pair of earlier examples to get a sense of how the
process works. First, let’s return to the Regan study, where we find that
the favor causing subjects to double the number of raffle tickets pur-
chased from Joe was not one they had requested. Joe had voluntarily
left the room and returned with one Coke for himself and one for the
subject. There was not a single subject who refused the Coke. It is easy
to see why it would have been awkward to turn down Joe’s favor: Joe
had already spent his money; a soft drink was an appropriate favor in
the situation, especially since Joe had one himself; it would have been
considered impolite to reject Joe’s thoughtful action. Nevertheless, re-
ceipt of that Coke produced an indebtedness that manifested itself
clearly when Joe announced his desire to sell some raffle tickets. Notice
the important asymmetry here—all the genuinely free choices were
Joe’s. He chose the form of the initial favor, and he chose the form of
the return favor. Of course, one could say that the subject had the choice
of saying no to both of Joe’s offers. But those would have been tough
choices. To have said no at either point would have required the subject
to go against the natural cultural forces favoring reciprocation arrange-
ments that Jujitsu Joe had aligned himself with.
The extent to which even an unwanted favor, once received, can
produce indebtedness is aptly illustrated in the soliciting technique of
the Hare Krishna Society. During systematic observation of the airport
soliciting strategy of the Krishnas, I have recorded a variety of responses
from target persons. One of the most regular occurs as follows. An air-
port visitor—a businessman, let’s say—is hurriedly walking along
through a densely peopled area. The Krishna solicitor steps in front of
him and hands him a flower. The man, reacting with surprise, takes it.7
Almost immediately, he tries to give it back, saying that he does not
want the flower. The Krishna member responds that it is a gift from the
Krishna Society and that it is the man’s to keep…however, a donation
to further the Society’s good works would be appreciated. Again the
target protests, “I don’t want this flower. Here, take it.” And again the
solicitor refuses, “It’s our gift to you, sir.” There is visible conflict on
the businessman’s face. Should he keep the flower and walk away
without giving anything in return, or should he yield to the pressure
of the deeply ingrained reciprocity rule and provide a contribution? By
now, the conflict has spread from his face to his posture. He leans awayRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 23