played. Click and the appropriate tape is activated; whirr and out rolls
the standard sequence of behaviors.
The most interesting thing about all this is the way the tapes are ac-
tivated. When a male animal acts to defend his territory, for instance,
it is the intrusion of another male of the same species that cues the ter-
ritorial-defense tape of rigid vigilance, threat, and, if need be, combat
behaviors. But there is a quirk in the system. It is not the rival male as
a whole that is the trigger; it is some specific feature of him, the trigger
feature. Often the trigger feature will be just one tiny aspect of the totality
that is the approaching intruder. Sometimes a shade of color is the
trigger feature. The experiments of ethologists have shown, for instance,
that a male robin, acting as if a rival robin had entered its territory, will
vigorously attack nothing more than a clump of robin-redbreast feathers
placed there. At the same time, it will virtually ignore a perfect stuffed
replica of a male robin without red breast feathers; similar results have
been found in another species of bird, the bluethroat, where it appears
that the trigger for territorial defense is a specific shade of blue breast
feathers.2
Before we enjoy too smugly the ease with which lower animals can
be tricked by trigger features into reacting in ways wholly inappropriate
to the situation, we might realize two things. First, the automatic, fixed-
action patterns of these animals work very well the great majority of
the time. For example, because only healthy, normal turkey chicks make
the peculiar sound of baby turkeys, it makes sense for mother turkeys
to respond maternally to that single “cheep-cheep” noise. By reacting
to just that one stimulus, the average mother turkey will nearly always
behave correctly. It takes a trickster like a scientist to make her tapelike
response seem silly. The second important thing to understand is that
we, too, have our preprogrammed tapes; and, although they usually
work to our advantage, the trigger features that activate them can be
used to dupe us into playing them at the wrong times.3
This parallel form of human automatic action is aptly demonstrated
in an experiment by Harvard social psychologist Ellen Langer. A well-
known principle of human behavior says that when we ask someone
to do us a favor we will be more successful if we provide a reason.
People simply like to have reasons for what they do. Langer demon-
strated this unsurprising fact by asking a small favor of people waiting
in line to use a library copying machine: Excuse me, I have five pages. May
I use the Xerox machine because I’m in a rush? The effectiveness of this
request-plus-reason was nearly total: Ninety-four percent of those asked
let her skip ahead of them in line. Compare this success rate to the results
when she made the request only: Excuse me, I have five pages. May I useRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 3