ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
An array of people deserve and have my appreciation for their aid in
making this book possible. Several of my academic colleagues read and
provided perceptive comments on the entire manuscript in its initial
draft form, greatly strengthening the subsequent version. They are Gus
Levine, Doug Kenrick, Art Beaman, and Mark Zanna. In addition, the
first draft was read by a few family members and friends—Richard and
Gloria Cialdini, Bobette Gorden, and Ted Hall—who offered not only
much-needed emotional support but insightful substantive commentary
as well.
A second, larger group provided helpful suggestions for selected
chapters or groups of chapters: Todd Anderson, Sandy Braver, Catherine
Chambers, Judy Cialdini, Nancy Eisenberg, Larry Ettkin, Joanne Gersten,
Jeff Goldstein, Betsy Hans, Valerie Hans, Joe Hepworth, Holly Hunt,
Ann Inskeep, Barry Leshowitz, Darwyn Linder, Debbie Littler, John
Mowen, Igor Pavlov, Janis Posner, Trish Puryear, Marilyn Rall, John
Reich, Peter Reingen, Diane Ruble, Phyllis Sensenig, Roman Sherman,
and Henry Wellman.
Certain people were instrumental at the beginning stages. John Staley
was the first publishing professional to recognize the project’s potential.
Jim Sherman, Al Goethals, John Keating, and Dan Wegner provided
early, positive reviews that encouraged author and editors alike. William
Morrow and Company’s then president, Larry Hughes, sent a small
but enthusiastic note that fortified me importantly for the task that lay
ahead. Last and hardly least, Maria Guarnaschelli believed with me
from the start in the book I wanted to write. It is to her editorial credit
that the finished product remains that book, much improved. For her
insightful direction and her potent efforts in the book’s behalf, I am
most grateful.
In addition, I would be remiss if I did not recognize the skill and effi-
ciency of Sally Carney at manuscript preparation and the sound counsel
of my attorney, Robert Brandes.
Finally, throughout the project, no one was more on my side than
Bobette Gorden, who lived every word with me.