cient strategy is hardly our antagonist but rather must be considered a
cooperating partner.
The story becomes quite different, however, should a compliance
practitioner try to stimulate a shortcut response by giving us a fraudu-
lent signal for it. The enemy is the advertiser who seeks to create an
image of popularity for a brand of toothpaste by, say, constructing a
series of staged “unrehearsed-interview” commercials in which an array
of actors posing as ordinary citizens praise the product. Here, where
the evidence of popularity is counterfeit, we, the principle of social
proof, and our shortcut response to it, are all being exploited. In an
earlier chapter, I recommended against the purchase of any product
featured in a faked “unrehearsed-interview” ad, and I urged that we
send the product manufacturers letters detailing the reason and suggest-
ing that they dismiss their advertising agency. I would recommend
extending this aggressive stance to any situation in which a compliance
professional abuses the principle of social proof (or any other weapon
of influence) in this manner. We should refuse to watch TV programs
that use canned laughter. If we see a bartender beginning a shift by
salting his tip jar with a bill or two of his own, he should get none from
us. If, after waiting in line outside a nightclub, we discover from the
amount of available space that the wait was designed to impress pass-
ersby with false evidence of the club’s popularity, we should leave im-
mediately and announce our reason to those still in line. In short, we
should be willing to use boycott, threat, confrontation, censure, tirade,
nearly anything, to retaliate.
I don’t consider myself pugnacious by nature, but I actively advocate
such belligerent actions because in a way I am at war with the ex-
ploiters—we all are. It is important to recognize, however, that their
motive for profit is not the cause for hostilities; that motive, after all, is
something we each share to an extent. The real treachery, and the thing
we cannot tolerate, is any attempt to make their profit in a way that
threatens the reliability of our shortcuts. The blitz of modern daily life
demands that we have faithful shortcuts, sound rules of thumb to handle
it all. These are not luxuries any longer; they are out-and-out necessities
that figure to become increasingly vital as the pulse of daily life quick-
ens. That is why we should want to retaliate whenever we see someone
betraying one of our rules of thumb for profit. We want that rule to be
as effective as possible. But to the degree that its fitness for duty is
regularly undercut by the tricks of a profiteer, we naturally will use it
less and will be less able to cope efficiently with the decisional burdens
of our day. We cannot allow that without a fight. The stakes have gotten
too high.210 / Influence