stronger rival. And so it is for the exploiters of the weapons of automatic
influence that exist naturally around us. The exploiters can commission
the power of these weapons for use against their targets while exerting
little personal force. This last feature of the process allows the exploiters
an enormous additional benefit—the ability to manipulate without the
appearance of manipulation. Even the victims themselves tend to see
their compliance as determined by the action of natural forces rather
than by the designs of the person who profits from that compliance.
An example is in order. There is a principle in human perception, the
contrast principle, that affects the way we see the difference between
two things that are presented one after another. Simply put, if the second
item is fairly different from the first, we will tend to see it as more dif-
ferent than it actually is. So if we lift a light object first and then lift a
heavy object, we will estimate the second object to be heavier than if
we had lifted it without first trying the light one. The contrast principle
is well established in the field of psychophysics and applies to all sorts
of perceptions besides weight. If we are talking to a beautiful woman
at a cocktail party and are then joined by an unattractive one, the second
woman will strike us as less attractive than she actually is.
In fact, studies done on the contrast principle at Arizona State and
Montana State universities suggest that we may be less satisfied with
the physical attractiveness of our own lovers because of the way the
popular media bombard us with examples of unrealistically attractive
models. In one study college students rated a picture of an average-
looking member of the opposite sex as less attractive if they had first
looked through the ads in some popular magazines. In another study,
male college-dormitory residents rated the photo of a potential blind
date. Those who did so while watching an episode of the Charlie’s Angels
TV series viewed the blind date as a less attractive woman than those
who rated her while watching a different show. Apparently it was the
uncommon beauty of the Angels female stars that made the blind date
seem less attractive.6
A nice demonstration of perceptual contrast is sometimes employed
in psychophysics laboratories to introduce students to the principle
firsthand. Each student takes a turn sitting in front of three pails of
water—one cold, one at room temperature, and one hot. After placing
one hand in the cold water and one in the hot water, the student is told
to place both in the lukewarm water simultaneously. The look of amused
bewilderment that immediately registers tells the story: Even though
both hands are in the same bucket, the hand that has been in the cold
water feels as if it is now in hot water, while the one that was in the hot
water feels as if it is now in cold water. The point is that the sameRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 9