he sold the most tickets, he would win a fifty-dollar prize. Joe’s request
was for the subject to buy some raffle tickets at twenty-five cents apiece:
“Any would help, the more the better.” The major finding of the study
concerns the number of tickets subjects purchased from Joe under the
two conditions. Without question, Joe was more successful in selling
his raffle tickets to the subjects who had received his earlier favor. Ap-
parently feeling that they owed him something, these subjects bought
twice as many tickets as the subjects who had not been given the prior
favor. Although the Regan study represents a fairly simple demonstra-
tion of the workings of the rule for reciprocation, it illustrates several
important characteristics of the rule that, upon further consideration,
help us to understand how it may be profitably used.
The Rule Is Overpowering
One of the reasons reciprocation can be used so effectively as a device
for gaining another’s compliance is its power. The rule possesses awe-
some strength, often producing a “yes” response to a request that, except
for an existing feeling of indebtedness, would have surely been refused.
Some evidence of how the rule’s force can overpower the influence of
other factors that normally determine whether a request will be com-
plied with can be seen in a second result of the Regan study. Besides
his interest in the impact of the reciprocity rule on compliance, Regan
was also interested in how liking for a person affects the tendency to
comply with that person’s request. To measure how liking toward Joe
affected the subjects’ decisions to buy his raffle tickets, Regan had them
fill out several rating scales indicating how much they liked Joe. He
then compared their liking responses with the number of tickets they
had purchased from Joe. There was a significant tendency for subjects
to buy more raffle tickets from Joe the more they liked him. But this
alone is hardly a startling finding. Most of us would have guessed that
people are more willing to do a favor for someone they like.
The interesting thing about the Regan experiment, however, is that
the relationship between liking and compliance was completely wiped
out in the condition under which subjects had been given a Coke by
Joe. For those who owed him a favor, it made no difference whether
they liked him or not; they felt a sense of obligation to repay him, and
they did. The subjects in that condition who indicated that they disliked
Joe bought just as many of his tickets as did those who indicated that
they liked him. The rule for reciprocity was so strong that it simply
overwhelmed the influence of a factor—liking for the requester—that
normally affects the decision to comply.
Think of the implications. People we might ordinarily dislike—unsa-16 / Influence