the Xerox machine? Under those circumstances, only 60 percent of those
asked complied. At first glance, it appears that the crucial difference
between the two requests was the additional information provided by
the words “because I’m in a rush.” But a third type of request tried by
Langer showed that this was not the case. It seems that it was not the
whole series of words, but the first one, “because,” that made the differ-
ence. Instead of including a real reason for compliance, Langer’s third
type of request used the word “because” and then, adding nothing new,
merely restated the obvious: Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use the
Xerox machine because I have to make some copies? The result was that once
again nearly all (93 percent) agreed, even though no real reason, no
new information, was added to justify their compliance. Just as the
“cheep-cheep” sound of turkey chicks triggered an automatic mothering
response from maternal turkeys—even when it emanated from a stuffed
polecat—so, too, did the word “because” trigger an automatic compli-
ance response from Langer’s subjects, even when they were given no
subsequent reason to comply. Click, whirr!4
Although some of Langer’s additional findings show that there are
many situations in which human behavior does not work in a mechan-
ical, tape-activated way, what is astonishing is how often it does. For
instance, consider the strange behavior of those jewelry-store customers
who swooped down on an allotment of turquoise pieces only after the
items had been mistakenly offered at double their original price. I can
make no sense of their behavior, unless it is viewed in click, whirr terms.
The customers, mostly well-to-do vacationers with little knowledge
of turquoise, were using a standard principle—a stereotype—to guide
their buying: “expensive = good.” Thus the vacationers, who wanted
“good” jewelry, saw the turquoise pieces as decidedly more valuable
and desirable when nothing about them was enhanced but the price.
Price alone had become a trigger feature for quality; and a dramatic
increase in price alone had led to a dramatic increase in sales among
the quality-hungry buyers. Click, whirr!
It is easy to fault the tourists for their foolish purchase decisions. But
a close look offers a kinder view. These were people who had been
brought up on the rule “You get what you pay for” and who had seen
that rule borne out over and over in their lives. Before long, they had
translated the rule to mean “expensive = good.” The “expensive = good”
stereotype had worked quite well for them in the past, since normally
the price of an item increases along with its worth; a higher price typic-
ally reflects higher quality. So when they found themselves in the pos-
ition of wanting good turquoise jewelry without much knowledge of4 / Influence