The salesman—we can call him Phil—was to give me tips to help me
through my break-in period. One thing I quickly noticed was that
whenever Phil began showing a new set of customers potential buys,
he would start with a couple of undesirable houses. I asked him about
it, and he laughed. They were what he called “setup” properties. The
company maintained a run-down house or two on its lists at inflated
prices. These houses were not intended to be sold to customers but to
be shown to them, so that the genuine properties in the company’s in-
ventory would benefit from the comparison. Not all the sales staff made
use of the setup houses, but Phil did. He said he liked to watch his
prospects’ “eyes light up” when he showed the place he really wanted
to sell them after they had seen the run-down houses. “The house I got
them spotted for looks really great after they’ve first looked at a couple
of dumps.”
Automobile dealers use the contrast principle by waiting until the
price for a new car has been negotiated before suggesting one option
after another that might be added. In the wake of a fifteen-thousand-
dollar deal, the hundred or so dollars required for a nicety like an FM
radio seems almost trivial in comparison. The same will be true of the
added expense of accessories like tinted windows, dual side-view mir-
rors, whitewall tires, or special trim that the salesman might suggest
in sequence. The trick is to bring up the extras independently of one
another, so that each small price will seem petty when compared to the
already-determined much larger one. As the veteran car buyer can attest,
many a budget-sized final price figure has ballooned from the addition
of all those seemingly little options. While the customer stands, signed
contract in hand, wondering what happened and finding no one to
blame but himself, the car dealer stands smiling the knowing smile of
the jujitsu master.
READER’S REPORT
From the Parent of a College Coed
Dear Mother and Dad:
Since I left for college I have been remiss in writing and
I am sorry for my thoughtlessness in not having written be-
fore. I will bring you up to date now, but before you read on,
please sit down. You are not to read any further unless you
are sitting down, okay?
Well, then, I am getting along pretty well now. The skull
fracture and the concussion I got when I jumped out the
window of my dormitory when it caught on fire shortly after
my arrival here is pretty well healed now. I only spent twoRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 11