selves to their initial estimates at all; they just kept the estimates in mind
privately.
In these ways, Deutsch and Gerard had cleverly arranged for some
students to commit themselves publicly, some privately, and some not
at all to their initial decisions. What Deutsch and Gerard wanted to find
out was which of the three types of students would be most inclined
to stick with their first judgments after receiving information that those
judgments were incorrect. So all of the students were given new evid-
ence suggesting that their initial estimates were wrong, and they were
then given the chance to change their estimates.
The results were quite clear. The students who had never written
down their first choices were the least loyal to those choices. When new
evidence was presented that questioned the wisdom of decisions that
had never left their heads, these students were the most influenced by
the new information to change what they had viewed as the “correct”
decision. Compared to these uncommitted students, those who had
merely written their decisions for a moment on a Magic Pad were sig-
nificantly less willing to change their minds when given the chance.
Even though they had committed themselves under the most anonym-
ous of circumstances, the act of writing down their first judgments
caused them to resist the influence of contradictory new data and to
remain consistent with the preliminary choices. But Deutsch and Gerard
found that, by far, it was the students who had publicly recorded their
initial positions who most resolutely refused to shift from those positions
later. Public commitment had hardened them into the most stubborn
of all.
This sort of stubbornness can occur even in situations where accuracy
should be more important than consistency. In one study, when six- or
twelve-person experimental juries were deciding a close case, hung
juries were significantly more frequent if the jurors had to express their
opinions with a visible show of hands rather than by secret ballot. Once
jurors had stated their initial views publicly, they were reluctant to allow
themselves to change publicly, either. Should you ever find yourself as
the foreperson of a jury under these conditions, then, you could reduce
the risk of a hung jury by choosing a secret rather than public balloting
technique.11
The Deutsch and Gerard finding that we are truest to our decisions
if we have bound ourselves to them publicly can be put to good use.
Consider the organizations dedicated to helping people rid themselves
of bad habits. Many weight-reduction clinics, for instance, understand
that often a person’s private decision to lose weight will be too weak
to withstand the blandishments of bakery windows, wafting cooking
scents, and late-night Sara Lee commercials. So they see to it that theRobert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 63