An equally compelling point regarding the power of reciprocity comes
from an account of a woman who saved her life not by giving a gift as
did the captured soldier, but by refusing a gift and the powerful obliga-
tions that went with it. The woman, Diane Louie, was an inhabitant of
Jonestown, Guyana, in November of 1978 when its leader, Jim Jones,
called for the mass suicide of all residents, most of whom compliantly
drank and died from a vat of poison-laced Kool-Aid. Diane Louie,
however, rejected Jones’s command and made her way out of Jonestown
and into the jungle. She attributes her willingness to do so to her earlier
refusal to accept special favors from him when she was in need. She
turned down his offer of special food while she was ill because “I knew
once he gave me those privileges, he’d have me. I didn’t want to owe
him nothin’.”
The Rule Enforces Uninvited Debts
Earlier we suggested that the power of the reciprocity rule is such that
by first doing us a favor, strange, disliked, or unwelcome others can
enhance the chance that we will comply with one of their requests.
However, there is another aspect of the rule, besides its power, that al-
lows this phenomenon to occur. Another person can trigger a feeling
of indebtedness by doing us an uninvited favor. Recall that the rule
only states that we should provide to others the kind of actions they
have provided us; it does not require us to have asked for what we have
received in order to feel obligated to repay. For instance, the Disabled
American Veterans organization reports that its simple mail appeal for
donations produces a response rate of about 18 percent. But when the
mailing also includes an unsolicited gift (gummed, individualized ad-
dress labels), the success rate nearly doubles to 35 percent. This is not
to say that we might not feel a stronger sense of obligation to return a
favor we have requested, only that such a request is not necessary to
produce our indebtedness.
If we reflect for a moment about the social purpose of the reciprocity
rule, we can see why this should be so. The rule was established to
promote the development of reciprocal relationships between individu-
als so that one person could initiate such a relationship without the fear
of loss. If the rule is to serve that purpose, then, an uninvited first favor
must have the ability to create an obligation. Recall, also, that reciprocal
relationships confer an extraordinary advantage upon cultures that
foster them and that, consequently, there will be strong pressures to
ensure that the rule does serve its purpose. Little wonder, then, that
the influential French anthropologist Marcel Mauss, in describing the
social pressures surrounding the gift-giving process in human culture,22 / Influence