observer to such a hunt described the deadly outcome of the buffalo’s
obsessive trust in collective knowledge.
In this way, it was possible to decoy a herd toward a precipice, and
cause it to plunge over en masse, the leaders being thrust over by
their followers and all the rest following of their own free will.16
Certainly, a flier whose plane is locked onto automatic pilot would
be wise to glance occasionally at the instrument panel and out the
window. In the same way, we need to look up and around periodically
whenever we are locked onto the evidence of the crowd. Without this
simple safeguard against misguided social proof, our prospects might
well run parallel to those of the freeway lane switchers and the North
American buffalo: Crash.
READER’S REPORT
From a Former Racetrack Employee
“I became aware of one method of faking social evidence to one’s ad-
vantage while working at a racetrack. In order to lower the odds and
make more money, some bettors are able to sway the public to bet on
bad horses.
“Odds at a racetrack are based on where the money is being bet. The
more money on a horse, the lower (better) the odds. Many people who
play the horses have surprisingly little knowledge of racing or betting
strategy. Thus, especially when they don’t know much about the horses
in a particular race, a lot of times they’ll simply bet the favorite. Because
tote boards are displayed with up-to-the-minute odds, the public can
always tell who the current favorite is. The system that a high roller
can use to alter the odds is actually quite simple. The guy has in mind
a horse he feels has a good chance of winning. Next he chooses a horse
that has long odds (say, 15 to 1) and doesn’t have a realistic chance to
win. The minute the mutual windows open, the guy puts down a
hundred dollars on the inferior horse, creating an instant favorite whose
odds on the board drop to about 2 to 1.
“Now the elements of social proof begin to work. People who are
uncertain of how to bet the race look to the tote board to see which
horse the early bettors have decided is a favorite, and they follow. A
snowballing effect now occurs as other people continue to bet the favor-
ite. At this point, the high roller can go back to the window and bet
heavily on his true favorite, which will have better odds now because
the ‘new favorite’ has pushed down the board. If the guy wins, the initial
hundred-dollar investment will have been worth it many times over.
“I’ve seen this happen myself. I remember one time a person put124 / Influence