most of the group were talking openly about the failure of the escort
to come at midnight. The group seemed near dissolution.
In the midst of this gathering doubt, as cracks crawled through the
believers’ confidence, the researchers witnessed a pair of remarkable
incidents, one after another. The first occurred at about 4:45 A.M., when
Marian Keech’s hand suddenly leapt to the task of transcribing through
“automatic writing” the text of a holy message from above. When read
aloud, the communication proved to be an elegant explanation for the
events of that night. “The little group, sitting alone all night long, had
spread so much light that God had saved the world from destruction.”
Although neat and efficient, this explanation was not wholly satisfying
by itself; for example, after hearing it, one member simply rose, put on
his hat and coat, and left. Something additional was needed to restore
the believers to their previous levels of faith.
It was at this point that the second notable incident occurred to meet
that need. Once again, the words of those who were present offer a
vivid description:
The atmosphere in the group changed abruptly and so did their
behavior. Within minutes after she had read the message explaining
the disconfirmation, Mrs. Keech received another message instruct-
ing her to publicize the explanation. She reached for the telephone
and began dialing the number of a newspaper. While she was
waiting to be connected, someone asked: “Marian, is this the first
time you have called the newspaper yourself?” Her reply was im-
mediate: “Oh, yes, this is the first time I have ever called them. I
have never had anything to tell them before, but now I feel it is
urgent.” The whole group could have echoed her feelings, for they
all felt a sense of urgency. As soon as Marian had finished her call,
the other members took turns telephoning newspapers, wire ser-
vices, radio stations, and national magazines to spread the explan-
ation of the failure of the flood. In their desire to spread the word
quickly and resoundingly, the believers now opened for public at-
tention matters that had been thus far utterly secret. Where only
hours earlier they had shunned newspaper reporters and felt that
the attention they were getting in the press was painful, they now
became avid seekers for publicity.
Not only had the long-standing policies concerning secrecy and
publicity done an about-face, so, too, had the group’s attitude toward
potential converts. Whereas likely recruits who previously visited the
house had been mostly ignored, turned away, or treated with casual
attention, the day following the disconfirmation saw a different story.96 / Influence