magazine of the Society, or, in the most cost-effective version, a flower.
The unsuspecting passerby who suddenly finds a flower pressed into
his hands or pinned to his jacket is under no circumstances allowed to
give it back, even if he asserts that he does not want it. “No, it is our
gift to you,” says the solicitor, refusing to accept it. Only after the
Krishna member has thus brought the force of the reciprocation rule to
bear on the situation is the target asked to provide a contribution to the
Society. This benefactor-before-beggar strategy has been wildly success-
ful for the Hare Krishna Society, producing large-scale economic gains
and funding the ownership of temples, businesses, houses, and property
in 321 centers in the United States and overseas.
As an aside, it is instructive that the reciprocation rule has begun to
outlive its usefulness for the Krishnas, not because the rule itself is any
less potent societally, but because we have found ways to prevent the
Krishnas from using it on us. After once falling victim to their tactic,
many travelers are now alert to the presence of robed Krishna Society
solicitors in airports and train stations, adjusting their paths to avoid
an encounter and preparing beforehand to ward off a solicitor’s “gift.”
Although the Society has tried to counter this increased vigilance by
instructing members to be dressed and groomed in modern styles to
avoid immediate recognition when soliciting (some actually carry flight
bags or suitcases), even disguise has not worked especially well for 
the Krishnas. Too many individuals now know better than to accept 
unrequested offerings in public places like airports. Furthermore,
airport administrators have initiated a number of procedures designed
to forewarn us of the Krishnas’ true identity and intent. Thus, it is now
common airport practice to restrict the Krishnas’ soliciting activity to
certain areas of the airport and to announce through signs and the
public address system that the Krishnas are soliciting there. It is a test-
ament to the societal value of reciprocation that we have chosen to fight
the Krishnas mostly by seeking to avoid rather than to withstand the
force of their gift giving. The reciprocity rule that empowers their tactic
is too strong—and socially beneficial—for us to want to violate it.
Politics is another arena in which the power of the reciprocity rule
shows itself. Reciprocation tactics appear at every level:
•At the top, elected officials engage in “logrolling” and the exchange
of favors that makes politics the place of strange bedfellows, indeed.
The out-of-character vote of one of our elected representatives on a
bill or measure can often be understood as a favor returned to the
bill’s sponsor. Political analysts were amazed at Lyndon Johnson’s
ability to get so many of his programs through Congress during his
early administration. Even members of congress who were thought18 / Influence