The Magic Act
Our best evidence of what people truly feel and believe comes less from
their words than from their deeds. Observers trying to decide what a
man is like look closely at his actions. What the Chinese have discovered
is that the man himself uses this same evidence to decide what he is
like. His behavior tells him about himself; it is a primary source of in-
formation about his beliefs and values and attitudes. Understanding
fully this important principle of self-perception, the Chinese set about
arranging the prison-camp experience so that their captives would
consistently act in desired ways. Before long, the Chinese knew, these
actions would begin to take their toll, causing the men to change their
views of themselves to align with what they had done.
Writing was one sort of confirming action that the Chinese urged
incessantly upon the men. It was never enough for the prisoners to
listen quietly or even to agree verbally with the Chinese line; they were
always pushed to write it down as well. So intent were the Chinese on
securing a written statement that if a prisoner was not willing to write
a desired response freely, he was prevailed upon to copy it. The
American psychologist Edgar Schein describes a standard indoctrination
session tactic of the Chinese in these terms:
A further technique was to have the man write out the question
and then the [pro-Communist] answer. If he refused to write it
voluntarily, he was asked to copy it from the notebooks, which
must have seemed like a harmless enough concession.
But, oh, those “harmless” concessions. We’ve already seen how ap-
parently trifling commitments can lead to extraordinary further beha-
vior. And the Chinese knew that, as a commitment device, a written
declaration has some great advantages. First, it provides physical
evidence that the act occurred. Once a man wrote what the Chinese
wanted, it was very difficult for him to believe that he had not done so.
The opportunities to forget or to deny to himself what he had done
were not available, as they are for purely verbal statements. No; there
it was in his own handwriting, an irrevocably documented act driving
him to make his beliefs and his self-image consistent with what he had
undeniably done.
A second advantage of a written testament is that it can be shown to
other people. Of course, that means it can be used to persuade those
people. It can persuade them to change their own attitudes in the direc-
tion of the statement. But more important for the purpose of commit-
ment, it can persuade them that the author genuinely believes what58 / Influence